<<PAGE 1>>
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE EXAMINEES 
PAPER – 4: COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a)  This numerical question was based on ‘Marginal Costing’. 
Question requires to calculate the break-even sales in value for each machine 
and calculate sales level in units where both the machines are equally 
profitable. Overall performance of the examinees was Above Average.  
(b) This numerical question was based on ‘Unit & Batch Costing’. The 
requirement of this question was to calculate contribution per unit of good 
units after adjusting rejected units and also ascertain the company’s total 
monthly profit. Overall performance of the examinees was Below Average.  
(c) This numerical question was based on ‘Material Cost’ and the requirement 
of the question was to calculate the maximum consumption per day and 
minimum consumption per day for raw material. Overall performance of the 
examinees was Below Average.  
Question 2.(a) This numerical question was based on ‘Cost Sheet’. The 
requirement of the question was to prepare a cost statement. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Average.  
(b) This numerical question was based on ‘Employee Cost and Direct 
Expenses’. The examinees were asked to calculate earnings of a skilled worker 
under Halsey (50% plan) and Rowan plan and suggest which plan is more 
beneficial for the worker. Most of the examinees performed well, hence the 
overall performance was Good. 
Question 3.(a) This numerical question was based on ‘Process Costing’. The 
requirement of this question was to prepare Process X account, Process Y 
account, Normal Loss account and Abnormal Gain account. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Average.  
(b) This numerical question was based on ‘Marginal Costing’. The 
requirement of the question was to calculate the effect on profits under three 
alternative and recommend which alternative is most likely to be adopted to 
get the maximum profit. Overall performance of the examinees was Good. 
<<PAGE 2>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: JANUARY 2025 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
98 
Question 4.(a) This numerical question was based on ‘Service Costing’. The 
requirement of this question was to calculate the bus fare to be charged per 
passenger. Overall, Average performance was observed.  
(b) This numerical question was based on ‘Overheads- Absorption Costing 
Method’. The question required the candidate to calculate overhead recovery 
rates for 2023 based on actual costs and prepare a comprehensive cost 
statement for the bulk order and determine the sales required for achieving a 
profit margin of 20% on the final sales amount. Overall performance of the 
examinees was Below Average.  
Question 5.(a) This numerical question was based on ‘Standard Costing’. 
The requirement of this question was to calculate actual labour rate per hour, 
standard hours required, labour efficiency variance, standard labour cost per 
unit and actual labour cost per unit. Overall performance of the examinees 
was Average.  
(b) This numerical question was based on ‘Cost Accounting System’. The 
requirement of this question was to journalise few transactions assuming cost 
and financial accounts are integrated. Overall performance of the examinees 
was Below Average.  
(c) This theoretical question was based on ‘Job Costing’. The requirement of 
the question was to define spoiled work and defective work and discuss the 
treatment of defective work in certain circumstances. Overall performance of 
the examinees was Below Average. 
Question 6.(a) This theoretical question was based on ‘Cost Accounting 
Systems’. The requirement of this question was to explain the steps involved 
in the procedure for reconciliation of cost and financial accounts and 
circumstances where reconciliation statement can be avoided Overall 
performance of the examinees was Above Average.  
(b) This theoretical question was based on ‘Introduction to Cost and 
Management Accounting’. The requirement of this question was to state the 
cost unit for few industry sectors. Overall performance of the examinees was 
Above Average.  
(c) This theoretical question was based on ‘Overheads – Absorption Costing 
Method’. The requirement of this question was to explain the methods that 
can be used for controlling Selling and Distribution Overheads. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Poor. 
<<PAGE 3>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
99 
OR 
Internal Choice Question  
This theoretical question was based on ‘Overheads -Absorption Costing 
Method’. The requirement of this question was to suggest any one basis of re-
apportionment of service department overheads over production department 
overhead in given contexts. Overall performance of the examinees was Poor.  
PAPER – 5: AUDITING AND ETHICS 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a) Considerations while framing audit strategy and whether 
procedures planned are in line with SA 300: Majority of the examinees 
could not explain the need for establishment of audit strategy and the factors 
to be considered while establishing audit strategy. Examinees simply 
concluded that the planned inquiry with the IT Head is in line with SA 300 
without appropriate discussions about understanding of the legal and 
regulatory framework and how the entity is complying with risk assessment 
procedures.  
(b) Key responsibilities of the auditor and audit procedures in relation to 
segment information: Many examinees failed 
to explain the key 
responsibilities of the auditor in relation to segment information. Further, they 
could not specify the audit procedure to be performed to ensure that the 
methods used by the management to present segment information are in 
accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework.  
(c) Existence of a satisfactory control environment is not an absolute 
deterrent to fraud: Most of the examinees could not justify and explain how 
the existence of a satisfactory control environment is not an absolute 
deterrent to fraud. Moreover, many examinees incorrectly answered in context 
of inherent limitations of Internal control rather than control environment.  
Question 2.(a)  Difference between "Historical Financial Information" and 
"Prospective Financial Information" and Level of assurance in Prospective 
financial information: Majority of the examinees had explained the differences 
in general manner. Many of them had written irrelevant answers discussing 
types of assurances like limited assurance, reasonable assurance and lower 
<<PAGE 4>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: JANUARY 2025 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
100 
level of assurance. With regard to the second part of the question on level of 
assurance on prospective financial information examinees could not answer 
properly except a few stating moderate level of assurance.  
(c) Sufficient appropriate audit evidence: Many examinees were able to 
give the meaning of sufficiency of audit evidence and mentioned the factors 
to be considered to ensure that the evidence collected is sufficient. However, 
some of the examinees were not able to explain the factors  
Question 3.(a) Presentation in terms of Schedule III of the Companies 
Act, 2013 and audit procedures for additions to Intangible assets: Most of 
the examinees failed to explain the second part of the question with regard to 
audit procedures for verifying additions to intangible assets during the year 
due to their poor knowledge on the matter.  
(b)  Going Concern and audit procedure in relation to cash flow forecast: 
Majority of the examinees were unable to explain the purposes of the 
statutory auditor of the company in the given situation from going concern 
point of view but could identify the going concern. With regard to the second 
part of the question, many examinees could not explain the audit procedures 
to be performed in relation to the cash flow forecast and answered in a 
general manner.  
(c)  Basis for Disclaimer of Opinion: While most of the examinees were 
unable to mention the amendment in the heading as "Basis for Disclaimer of 
Opinion", they were able to describe the matter giving rise to the 
modification. Additionally, majority of the examinees could not elucidate the 
items not to be included in the auditor's report when the auditor disclaims an 
opinion on the financial statements.  
Question 4.(c) Reporting under Emphasis of Matter paragraph: Though 
most of the examinees were able to identify that the given case should be 
reported under "Emphasis of Matter paragraph", majority of them could not 
state the matters to be included in an Emphasis of Matter paragraph in the 
Auditor's Report. Few examinees have unnecessarily explained the provisions 
of CARO, 2020, Key Audit Matters and Other Matters in Auditor's Report 
without understanding the requirement of the question.  
Question 5.(a) Documentation of overall audit strategy, audit plan, 
significant changes: Most of the examinees have written general answers on 
<<PAGE 5>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
101 
meaning of overall audit strategy, audit plan, significant changes made during 
audit engagement instead of documentation of the same as per the 
requirement of the question.  
(b) "Those Charged with Governance": Majority of the examinees were able 
to mention one or two relevant points out of the total five expected from 
them to be correctly mentioned.  Few examinees have explained about the 
matters to be communicated to Those Charged with Governance instead of 
explaining who can be the 'Those Charged with Governance'.  
(c) Investing the funds of Co-operative society: Most of the examinees 
lacked knowledge of the provisions of section 32 of the Central Act, with 
regard to the permissible investments for co-operative society's funds. 
However, examinees have given the  correct conclusion but their answers 
lacked justification without explaining the provisions of the Act.  
Question 6.(a) Steps involved in the verification of fees collected from 
examinees: Examinees highlighted the items that are to be checked like 
examinees register, fees register, cash book, books of account, admission fees, 
fines for late payment, caution deposit, receipt book, etc. in an isolated 
manner but could not correlate how these items are to be verified and 
examined by explaining the audit procedures like tracing, comparing, totaling, 
confirming, cross checking, authorizing in relation to the respective records 
maintained for collection.  
(b) Comparative financial statements: 'Treatment in audit report and 
disclosures': Most of the examinees failed to answer the first part of the 
question with regard to auditor's duty regarding the matters to be mentioned 
in the Modification paragraph in the auditor's report. However, for the second 
part, examinees were able to refer to "Other Matter paragraph" but could not 
state its contents.  
(c) Types of audit tests and factors determining when and which tests to 
apply: A few examinees attempted this part of the question. They were able 
to write relevant answer for the first part of the question, however, failed to 
give for the second part of the question with regard to factors determining 
which tests to apply. 
<<PAGE 6>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: JANUARY 2025 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
102 
PAPER  − 6: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT & STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
SECTION A – FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a)  This was a numerical question requiring preparation of cash 
budget and finding out the amount of short-term loan required or short term 
investment to be made considering the minimum cash balance to be 
maintained. Many examinees answered it well, however some examinees failed 
to arrive at correct figure of short term loan required. Overall performance 
was Above Average.  
(b) This was a numerical question to calculate the EPS, Operating Leverage, 
Financial Leverage and Combined Leverage. The performance of the 
examinees was Good. 
(c) This was a numerical question requiring examinees to determine the price 
of Equity share and the dividend payout ratio for a stated share price using 
Walter’s Model. The performance of the examinees was Above Average.  
Question 2.(a) This was a numerical question based on calculation of cost of 
equity share capital, cost of convertible debentures and cost of bank loan then 
calculate the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) of the company using 
market value weight. Many examinees failed to calculate the correct cost of 
equity shares using CAPM method and cost of convertible debentures which 
resulted in incorrect WACC. The performance of the examinees was Average.   
(b) This was a numerical question requiring examinees to calculate the 
working capital requirement using the operating cycle method. The 
performance of the examinees was above Average.  
Question 3.(a) This was a numerical question which required examinees to 
calculate the Net Present Value (NPV) and Profitability Index (PI) of the 
proposed project and advise the company on their basis. Most of the 
examinees failed to calculate correct cash inflows and cash outflows for the 
calculation of NPV and PI. The performance of the examinees showed lack of 
conceptual clarity on capital budgeting decisions. Overall performance was 
Below Average.  
(b) This was a numerical question on Ratio Analysis. Examinees were required 
to prepare the Balance Sheet of the Company. The performance of the 
examinees was Good.  
<<PAGE 7>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
103 
Question 4.(a) This was a theoretical question to explain the Environmental, 
Social and Governance (ESG) linked bonds. Most of the examinees exhibited 
poor knowledge. The performance of the examinees was Poor. 
(b) In this theoretical question, examinees were required to discuss the 
objectives and advantages of wealth maximization goal of financial 
management. The performance of the examinees was Poor.  
(c) In this theoretical question, examinees were asked to state any two 
advantages of virtual banking. The performance of the examinees was Good. 
OR 
This was a theoretical question requiring the examinees to state the concept 
of exclusion of Financing cost principle. The question was attempted by very 
few examinees. The performance of the examinees who attempted the 
question was Good.  
SECTION – B: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
Specific Comments 
Question 5.(a)  The overall performance was below average. Many examinees 
were unable to identify the Matrix Structure. Even among those who correctly 
identified it, many faced difficulties in adequately explaining its advantages 
and disadvantages. 
(b)  The performance was average. While examinees were able to correctly 
explain the strategic approaches, they struggled to outline the company's 
future strategies for achieving a competitive advantage. 
(c)  The examinees correctly identified the product as a ‘Star,’ but their 
performance remained average as they struggled to effectively explain the 
appropriate strategies thereafter. 
Question 6.(a)  The performance was below average. Examinees lacked 
proper knowledge of the concept and were unable to provide the expected 
answers. Their responses were vague, with many focusing on the cost aspect 
instead of explaining the internationalization of business. Additionally, the 
steps of strategic planning were presented in a disorganized manner, lacking 
proper sequence. 
<<PAGE 8>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: JANUARY 2025 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
104 
(b)  The performance was commendable. Most examinees demonstrated 
sufficient knowledge of Mendelow’s Matrix and explained it accurately.  
Question 7.(a)  The performance was above average. Examinees attempted 
this question appropriately and effectively explained the networks of 
relationships between the three levels.  
(b)  The performance was below average. Examinees struggled to understand 
the concept of strategic performance measures, leading to incorrect answers. 
Many responses were vague and irrelevant. 
Question 8.(a) The performance was average. Most students correctly 
mentioned and explained the headings of intense rivalry, but some struggled 
to contextualize it within the force outlined in the question. 
(b)  The performance in the first option was above average, with examinees 
demonstrating a clear understanding of Ansoff’s Matrix. However, in the 
second option, performance was poor due to a lack of understanding of 
strategic drivers in relation to other concepts, such as key success factors, 
leading to incorrect responses. 
 
