<<PAGE 1>>
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE EXAMINEES 
PAPER – 4: COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a)  This numerical question requires to calculate the total cost 
per batch, determine the minimum fee per student in a batch to cover costs 
and the fee to be charged from each student to achieve a profit margin of 
25% on the fee. Overall performance of the examinees was Good. 
(b)  This numerical question was based on ‘Cost Accounting System’ and the 
requirement of  the question was to prepare a reconciliation statement Overall 
performance of the examinees was Above Average.  
(c) It is a numerical question based on ‘Marginal Costing’. The requirement of 
the question was to advise the company whether the offer for additional order 
at a reduced selling price should be accepted. Overall performance of the 
examinees was Poor.  
Question 2(a) This numerical question was based on ‘Cost Sheet’. Examinees 
were asked  to prepare Cost Sheet for two – month period. Overall, Above 
Average performance was observed.  
(b)  This numerical question was based on ‘Employee Cost and Direct 
Expenses’. The question required examinees to calculate the labour cost 
chargeable to job and overheads in given situations. Overall performance of 
the examinees was Below Average. 
Question 3.(a) This numerical question was based chapter ‘Activity Based 
Costing’. The requirement of this question was to compute the cost of two 
product based on traditional absorption costing system and Activity Based 
Costing System. Overall performance of the examinees was Average.  
(b)  This numerical question was based on ‘Budget and Budgetary Control’. 
The requirement of the question was to prepare a flexible budget at different 
activity levels. Most of the examinees performed well, hence the overall 
performance was Good. 
Question 4.(a) This numerical question was based on ‘Standard Costing’. This 
question required the examinees to calculate material and labour variances. 
Overall performance of the examinees was Average.  
<<PAGE 2>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
107 
(b)  In this numerical question examinees were asked to explain the concept 
of Build operate Transfer (BOT) approach and classify few given expenses in 
Capital Cost or Operating and Maintenance Cost for Toll Roads. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Average.    
Question 5.(a) This numerical question was based on ‘Overheads’. The 
requirement of this question was to compute the machine hour rate for each 
machine. Overall performance of the candidate was Average.  
(b)  This was a numerical question related to different aspects of Marginal 
Costing. Examinees were required to prepare a detailed statement showing 
overall contribution and profit of the company after accepting the dealer’s 
proposal. Overall performance of the candidate was Below Average.  
Question 6.(a) This was a theoretical question to describe five benefits of 
Digital Costing System. Overall performance of the examinees was Poor. 
(b)  In this theoretical question examinees were required to define various 
terms such as controllable variance, uncontrollable variance, budget manual, 
performance budgeting and budget period. Overall performance of the 
examinees was Below Average.    
(c)  This theoretical question required examinees to discuss the treatment of 
by-products in cost accounting. Overall performance of the examinees was 
Below Average.  
OR 
Internal Choice Question 
This theoretical question requires the examinees to define job costing and 
explain the differences between job and batch costing. Overall performance of 
the examinees was Below Average.  
PAPER – 5: AUDITING AND ETHICS 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a) Facts Which Become Known to the Auditor After the Date of 
the Auditor's Report but Before the Date the Financial Statements are Issued: 
Majority of the examinees could not conclude correctly that the auditor has 
no obligation to perform any audit procedures regarding the financial 
statements after the date of the auditor's report. Examinees simply mentioned 
<<PAGE 3>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
108 
new auditor's report without explaining that the date of the new audit report 
should not be earlier than the date of approval of the amended financial 
statements. 
(b) Sample Selection Methods: Examinees were able to identify the correct 
sample selection methods applicable in the given situation, however, 
explanations provided for the same was not correct. A few examinees mixed 
up stratified sampling with Random sampling, while some examinees mixed 
up Block sampling with Interval sampling. 
(d) Reporting responsibility of the auditor under paragraph 3 of CARO, 
2020: The examinees lacked knowledge of the reporting responsibility of the 
auditor about statutory dues as per clause (vii) (a) and (vii) (b) of Paragraph 3 
of CARO, 2020. Many examinees failed to correctly state the reporting 
requirements in the case of arrears of undisputed and disputed statutory 
dues. 
Question 2.(a)  Inquiries of Management and Others Within the Entity: 
Examinees failed to explain procedures that can be applied while undertaking 
test of control in understanding whether internal control system was 
operating in the company. Many of them were not able to correctly identify 
that the Re-performance procedure is applicable in the given case. 
(c)  Disclosure of Ratios as per Schedule III of the Companies Act, 2013 
and its rules: Most of the Examinees could not mention required ratios 
correctly. Some Examinees listed out ratios like gross profit ratio, liquidity 
ratio and other irrelevant ratios which were not mandated in Schedule III of 
the Companies Act, 2013. Whereas, few examinees could not explain the rules 
relating to disclosure of ratios. 
(d)  Inter-relationship between audit strategy and audit plan: Most of the 
examinees failed to give the relevant points expected from them. Few 
Examinees tried to explain the concepts more individually rather than 
establishing a relation between the two. 
Question 3.(a) Identifying 
the 
components 
of 
Internal 
control: 
Examinees were not able to identify and explain the correct component of 
internal control applicable to the two given cases. Few examinees mixed up 
‘Monitoring of controls’ with ‘Monitoring activities’, while few of them listed 
all the components of internal control in a general manner, while others 
reproduced the explanation given in the question. 
<<PAGE 4>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
109 
(b)  Items not forming part of Audit documentation: Majority of the 
examinees correctly concluded that filing of draft inventory sheet is not 
proper. However, they failed to list out the items which are not to be included 
in audit documentation. Few of them misunderstood the question and listed 
the items which form part of audit documentation. 
(c)  Out of Order in the case of cash credit account: Most of the examinees 
could not explain the conditions for a cash credit account to be treated as out 
of order. Some of the examinees gave general answers for an account to 
become NPA. 
Question 4.(c)  Appropriate and Inappropriate Phrases while drafting an 
Unmodified Opinion: Examinees have not understood the requirement of the 
question and have given irrelevant answers with regard to modified opinion. 
While drafting an unmodified opinion, examinees mentioned about "true and 
fair view" but failed to mention "present fairly in all material respects" with 
regard to appropriate phrases.  
(d) Special report to the Registrar of Co-operative society: Majority of the 
examinees discussed all types of irregularities in a general manner rather than 
covering specific points while reporting special matters for reporting to the 
Registrar when serious irregularities are noticed. 
Question 5.(a) Review of the audit programme: Many Examinees have 
given only correct conclusion regarding the use of previous year's audit 
programme but failed to discuss the utility of periodic review of audit 
programme. Few examinees have given general answers on advantages and 
disadvantages of audit programme instead of focusing on periodic review of 
audit programme. 
(b)  Evaluating the work of an actuary-expert: Majority of the examinees 
gave relevant points about evaluation of competence, capabilities and 
objectivity of actuary- expert, however, failed to mention regarding obtaining 
an understanding his work. 
(c) Use of Digital Technology in the conducting an audit: Many examinees 
discussed the general benefits of digital technology instead of focusing on 
how it is helpful to auditors. 
Question 6.(a)  Audit of Provisions and contingencies in Bank: Examinees 
were not able to describe the specific points in respect of provisions and 
contingencies in different situations. 
<<PAGE 5>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
110 
Alternative 
(a)  Meaning of Deficiency in internal control and communication of 
significant deficiency: Very few examinees could write about the meaning of 
deficiency in internal control and their discussions with regard to the 
appropriateness of communication of significant deficiency, were also 
incorrect. 
(c) Positive confirmation request and course of action: Majority of the 
Examinees have a fair idea on the positive confirmation request and the 
course of action to be taken by the auditor on the confirmation received. 
However, most of the examinees failed to discuss "exception" when the 
response indicated a difference. 
(d)  Points to be noted while examining a lease agreement: Most of the 
examinees failed to understand the question and written the conditions of 
financial lease to be verified. 
PAPER  − 6: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT & STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
SECTION A – FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a) This was a numerical question on Calculations Contribution, 
Maargin of Safety of two Companies N Ltd and C Ltd and Sales of C Ltd. 
Overall performance of the examinees was Good.  
(b)  This was a numerical question requiring examinees to calculate the 
working capital requirement using the operating cycle method. Many 
examinees lacked knowledge of calculating operating cycle and those who 
calculated the operating cycle correctly could not identify the operating 
expenses to be considered for calculation of working capital requirement. The 
performance of the examinees was Average. 
(c)  This was a numerical question on Ratio Analysis. Examinees are required 
to complete the balance sheet of the company. Overall performance was 
Good.  
Question 2.(a) This was a numerical question based on calculation of cost of 
equity share capital, preference share capital, and debentures then calculate 
the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) of the company using market 
value weight. Many examinees failed to use the YTM method as required in 
<<PAGE 6>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
111 
the question for calculation of cost of debentures. The performance of the 
examinees was Above Average.  
(b)  This was a theoretical question on ‘Angel Financing’. Most of the 
examinees exhibited lack of knowledge of the concept. The performance of 
the examinees was Below Average. 
Question 3.(a) This was a numerical question based on Deciding Best Credit 
Policies. Most of the examinees failed to consider the savings in cost due to 
extra credit given by creditors while calculating the net opportunity cost of 
receivables. The performance of the examinees was Below Average.  
(b)  In this numerical question, examinees were required to advise best capital 
raising option. Most of the examinees failed to consider the present earnings 
of the company for the calculation of EPS and market price under two options, 
which resulted in wrong results. The performance of the examinees was Poor.  
Question 4.(a) This was a theoretical question where examinees were 
required show two advantages and two disadvantages of raising finance by 
issue of debentures. The performance of the examinees was Average.  
(b)  In this theoretical question, examinees were required to list any four 
assumptions of Gordon’s model. Most of the examinees could not explain the 
assumptions properly. Performance of the examinees was Poor.  
(c)  In this theoretical question, examinees were asked to explain leveraged 
lease. The performance of the examinees was poor. 
OR 
(c)  This was a theoretical question requiring the examinees to state the 
remedies for Over capitalisation. The performance of the examinees was poor. 
 
 
SECTION – B: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
Specific Comments 
Question 5.(a) The performance was below average. While many examinees 
successfully identified the Network Structure, they faced difficulties in 
adequately explaining its merits and demerits. 
<<PAGE 7>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
112 
(b)  The performance was average. Examinees were able to correctly identify 
the Turnaround Strategy but struggled to describe the stages of the action 
plan in the correct sequence. 
(c)  The performance was poor. Most examinees were unable to identify the 
appropriate strategy, which affected their ability to explain its advantages and 
disadvantages. The responses were often vague and lacked clarity. 
Question 6.(a) The performance was commendable. Most examinees 
demonstrated sufficient knowledge and provided clear explanations of the 
characteristics of objectives. 
(b)  The performance was above average. Examinees attempted this question 
appropriately and on expected lines. 
Question 7.(a) The performance was poor, primarily due to a lack of 
understanding of the question. Many examinees provided vague and 
irrelevant responses. 
(b)  The performance was below average. While examinees agreed with the 
given statement, they were unable to clearly explain the circumstances under 
which the Stability Strategy is meaningful. 
Question 8.(a) The performance was good. Many examinees effectively 
explained the common barriers that may restrain new entrepreneurs. 
(b)  The overall performance was above average. In the first option, examinees 
clearly explained the various types of strategic performance measures. 
However, in the second option, while most examinees satisfactorily addressed 
the pointers for navigating change during digital transformation, a few 
incorrectly described it as part of the general management process. 
 
 
