<<PAGE 1>>
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE EXAMINEES 
PAPER – 4: COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a)  This numerical question was based Economic Order Quantity 
(EOQ), Re-order level and advise whether quantity discount offer could be 
accepted.  Above Average performance was observed in this question. 
(b)  This numerical question was based on Joint-Product and By-Product 
Costing. Examinees were asked to apportion the joint costs using the Physical 
unit method and Contribution method. Examinees were also required to 
assess the impact on profitability if Product B is further processed. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Average.  
(c)  It is a numerical question based on Budgetary Control and examinees are 
required to calculate the actual hours worked, standard hours for actual 
output, activity ratio and standard capacity usage ratio from the information 
furnished in the question. The overall performance of the examinees was 
Below Average. 
Question 2.(a)  This numerical question was based on Activity Based Costing. 
Examinees were asked  to evaluate the profitability of its customers using the 
concept of Activity Based Costing. Overall performance of the examinees was 
Average.  
(b)  This numerical question was based on Service Costing. Examinees were 
asked to calculate the net operating income per flight for the airlines 
company and also to find out whether proposal of reduction in fare should be 
implemented by the company. Most of the examinees performed well, hence 
the overall performance was Above Average. 
Question 3.(a)  This numerical question was based on Budgets and Budgetary 
Control. Examinees were asked to calculate the profits of the company at 
different capacity levels. Most of the examinees performed well and an Above 
Average performance was observed. 
(b)  This numerical question was based on reconciliation of profit as per cost 
accounts with the profit as per financial accounts based on the information 
<<PAGE 2>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
85 
furnished. Most of the examinees have attempted this question correctly and 
overall performance of the examinees was Good. 
Question 4.(a)  This numerical question was based on Process and Operation 
Costing. Where examinees were required to prepare process accounts, 
abnormal loss account, abnormal gain account and costing profit and loss 
account. Overall performance of the examinees was Below Average.  
(b)  In this numerical question examinees were asked to calculate the amount 
of under absorption of production overheads during the year and show the 
treatment of under -absorption of production overheads in cost accounts. 
Most of the examinees performed well, hence the overall performance was 
Good. 
Question 5.(a)  This numerical question was based on calculation of profit 
lost due to labour turnover.  The overall performance of the examinees was 
Average.  
(b)  This was a numerical question related to different aspects of Marginal 
Costing. Examinees were required to calculate the Break-even sales and 
calculate sales volume required to earn a certain level of profit. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Average.  
(c)  This theoretical question was based on Feedback Control and 
Feedforward Control system of budgetary control. Overall performance of the 
examinees was Below Average.  
Question 6.(a)  This was a theoretical question to  distinguish between cost 
control and cost reduction. Overall performance of the examinees was Below 
Average.  
(b)  In this theoretical question examinees were required to distinguish 
between Waste and Scrap and discuss the treatment of normal and abnormal 
scrap in Cost Accounts. Overall performance of the examinees was Below 
Average.    
(c)  This theoretical question required examinees to describe Unit Costing and 
Batch Costing and give examples of industries for each method where these 
are used. Overall performance of the examinees was Below Average.  
 
 
<<PAGE 3>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: MAY 2024 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
86 
OR 
Internal Choice Question 
This theoretical question requires the examinees to describe idle time and 
explain the treatment of idle time in different situations. Overall performance 
of the examinees was Below Average.  
PAPER – 5: AUDITING AND ETHICS 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a) Matters to be considered while preparing an Audit 
Programme and whether same audit programme can be used for two different 
entities: Examinees have written the conclusion of the answer correctly but 
could not explain the matters generally considered while preparing an audit 
program. 
(c) Reporting responsibilities under Companies Act, 2013 for Internal 
Financial Control: The examinees failed to understand the requirement of 
question and answered  in terms of internal control instead of internal 
financial controls. Many examinees were not aware about the responsibilities 
of Independent Directors and Audit Committee in relation to internal financial 
controls. 
Question 2.(a) Inquires of Management and Others within the Entity: 
Majority of examinees wrote general points regarding types of inquiries from 
Marketing personnel and Information system personnel  rather than specific 
points. 
(c) Inherent limitations of audit: Some of the examinees mentioned 
inherent limitations of audit in  bullet points only without explaining the same.  
(d) Significant factors in directing the engagement team’s efforts: 
Majority of the examinees could write partial answer by mentioning one or 
two factors correctly, while rest of them mentioned general points and not 
specific factors relating to the question. 
Question 3.(a) Audit Planning: Majority of the examinees have written 
general points on audit planning instead of focusing on aspects prior to the 
auditor’s identification and assessment of the risks of material misstatement. 
<<PAGE 4>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
87 
(b) Written Representation: Examinees were able to write the concept of 
period of written representation to be given by the new management, 
however, majority of examinees could not relate to the concept that the date 
of management written representation should be before the date of auditor’s 
report. 
(c) Manual elements vs. automated elements in entity’s internal control: 
Majority of examinees could only cover the area of judgement and discretion 
where manual elements in internal control are suitable but failed to cover 
other specific points. 
(d) Using the Internal Audit Function: Instead of focusing on coordination 
between the external auditor and the internal audit function, examinees have 
discussed on the aspects of evaluation of the work of the internal auditor and 
relying on the work of the internal auditor. 
Question 4.(a) Factors to select specific items and specific items to be 
selected from a population: Most of the examinees wrote about different 
methods/types of Sampling (like random sampling, stratified sampling etc.) 
instead of writing about factors for selecting specific items and specific items 
to be selected for testing from the population. 
(b) Audit Procedures to obtain sufficient Audit evidence that the work of 
other Auditors is adequate: The examinee concentrated more on evaluation 
of the work of other auditor rather than writing about audit procedures 
required to obtain sufficient audit evidence that the work of other auditors is 
adequate for the principal auditor. 
(c) Disclosure requirements as per the Companies Act, 2013:  Majority of 
the examinees had no idea about the disclosure requirements as per 
Companies Act, 2013 with regard to loans given to Promoter, Director, KMP 
and the Related Party and mentioned points like whether loans are secured or 
not, whether proper interest has been charged etc. 
(d) Analytical Procedures: Majority of examinees wrote about different 
types of Analytical Procedures such a Reasonableness Test, Structural 
Modelling rather than writing specific Analytical Procedures required with 
regard to Purchases. 
<<PAGE 5>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: MAY 2024 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
88 
Question 5.(b) Examples of costs that are not costs of an item of PPE: 
Many examinees mentioned incorrect examples such as depreciation, 
borrowing cost etc. 
(d) Reporting requirements of a Nidhi Company under CARO 2020: 
Examinees have explained the three requirements of the relevant clause but 
could not cover the correct parameters of ratio and percentage as prescribed 
under CARO 2020 and also failed to cover the point of default of interest and 
principal repayment. 
Question 6.(a) Responsibilities of engagement partner for engagement 
quality control review as per SA 220: Majority of examinees focused on the 
qualities of the engagement partner like independence, leadership quality and 
competence etc. rather than writing about responsibilities of engagement 
partner for engagement quality control review. 
Alternative 
(a) Corpus Contribution and Revolving Fund (For Non-Governmental 
Organisations) 
A few examinees could refer corpus contribution as capital contribution and  
failed to explain the concept of revolving fund.  Most of the examinees 
incorrectly related the meaning of terms with utilisation of funds for specific 
and general use respectively. 
(b) Prudential norms (Asset Classification and Income Recognition) for 
loans guaranteed by Government: Some of the examinees could not 
distinguish between advances guaranteed by the State government and 
Central government.  They also failed to mention the concept of invocation of 
government guarantee in case of Central Government advances. 
(c)  Documentation regarding misstatements identified during audit: 
Majority of the examinees mentioned about the audit procedures to be 
undertaken on identification of the misstatements rather than audit 
documentation required for the misstatements. 
(d) Finance Lease as per AS 19:  Examinees were able to correctly identify 
the kind of lease and its taxation benefits.  However, the ownership status, 
that is, the option to buy the asset at the end of the finance lease term was 
not correctly mentioned by few examinees. 
<<PAGE 6>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
89 
PAPER  − 6: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT & STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
SECTION A – FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a)  This was a numerical question on Calculations of ratios. Most 
of the examinees could not calculate the gross profit ratio correctly. Hence, 
overall performance of the examinees was Below Average.  
(b)  This was a numerical question on Leverage and Change in EPS under two 
different scenarios. Many examinees performed very well in this question. The 
performance of the examinees was Good.  
(c)  This was a numerical question on Management of Receivables - rate of 
effective cost of factoring. Most of the examinees could not calculate the 
interest savings due to reduction in average collection period and interest 
cost on advance from the factor correctly and hence could not arrive at the 
final answer. Overall performance was Below Average.  
Question 2.(a)  This was a numerical question based on calculation of cost of 
equity share capital, preference share capital, debentures, retained earnings 
and term loan. Most of the examinees could not calculate the share 
redemption value required for calculation of cost of debentures correctly. 
Overall performance of the examinees was Above Average.  
(b)  This was a numerical question based on Arbitrage process of Capital 
Structure. Overall performance of the examinees was Average. 
Question 3.(a)  This was a numerical question based on Replacement decision 
under Capital Budgeting. Most of the examinees could not calculate the 
incremental depreciation correctly and hence failed to arrive at incremental 
CFAT. Hence, overall performance of the examinees was Poor.  
(b)  In this numerical question, examinees were required to calculate the 
Intrinsic value of shar using Dividend discount model. Most of the examinees 
failed apply correct formula of dividend discount model. Overall performance 
of the examinees was Below Average. 
Question 4.(a) This was a theoretical question where examinees were 
required to state whether the given statements were true or false with 
appropriate reasons. Overall performance of the examinees was Good.  
 
<<PAGE 7>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: MAY 2024 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
90 
(b)  In this theoretical question, examinees were required to explain some of 
the forms of bank credit. Most of the examinees could not explain the 
different forms of bank credit properly. Performance of the examinees was 
Average.  
(c)  In this theoretical question, examinees were asked to discuss the 
relevance of Payback reciprocal in capital budgeting decisions. Most of the 
examinees did not answer properly and hence, the performance of the 
examinees was poor. 
OR 
(c)  This was a theoretical question based on the features of crowd funding. 
Performance of the examinees was Poor. 
SECTION – B: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
Specific Comments 
Question 5.(a)  The performance was above average as many examinees 
were able to identify the McKinsey 7S Model correctly and write the elements. 
However, they struggled to adequately explain the limitations of the model.    
(b) The performance was average, as the examinees correctly identified the 
strategic level but were unable to effectively connect the benefits of strategic 
management to the given case. 
(c) Performance was below average. Examinees were not able to provide 
expected answers as they lacked proper knowledge of the concept. The 
answers given by them were very vague. Most of the examinees were not able 
to explain the benefits of interaction with the business environment. 
Question 6.(a) Most of the examinees wrote good answers, demonstrating 
sufficient knowledge to effectively support their disagreement with the 
statement. 
(b) The performance was below average as the examinees couldn’t attempt 
this question on correct lines due to lack of conceptual clarity of as how 
organizations can effectively manage strategic uncertainties in a rapidly 
changing business environment.  
Question 7.(a) The performance was good as the examinees were able to 
clearly explain the key characteristics of business products. 
<<PAGE 8>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
91 
(b) The performance was average as many examinees were able to explain 
the significance of the mission statement but not in a completely satisfactory 
manner.  
Question 8.(a) The performance was average as many examinees incorrectly 
explained channel analysis and provided only brief descriptions of the 
different types of channels. 
(b) The overall performance of the examinees was below average in the first 
option, as many were unable to clearly differentiate between forward and 
backward integration. However, in the second option, the strategic group 
mapping tool was correctly identified, and the procedure for using the tool 
was accurately described, resulting in a good performance. 
 
