<<PAGE 1>>
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE EXAMINEES 
PAPER – 4: COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a)  This numerical question was related calculation of number of 
large and small boxes used cost per large and small box and allocation of 
packaging cost among the finished products. Some examinees find difficulty 
in calculating cost per large and small box correctly leading to incorrect 
allocation of packaging cost among the finished products. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Average.  
(b) This numerical question was based on 'Joint and By Products'. The 
requirement of this question was to apportion joint costs among main 
products, determine profit or loss if joint products are sold without further 
processing and decision regarding which joint products can be further 
processed based on incremental analysis of profit. Many students apportioned 
the joint costs incorrectly among joint products without crediting the net 
realisable value of by product as per the requirement of question. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Below Average.  
(c) This numerical question was based on 'Employee Cost' and the 
requirement of the question was to calculate the remuneration of a worker 
based on two different incentive schemes i.e. Halsey and Rowan Plan. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Good.  
Question 2.(a) This numerical question was based on ‘Preparation of Cost 
Sheet'. The requirement of the question was to calculate raw material 
consumed. Prime cost, Works/factory cost, Cost of goods sold, Cost of sales, 
Net profit & Sales Some of the examinees could not calculate value of raw 
material consumed correctly taking the figure of cost of production as basis. 
Overall performance of the examinees was Average.  
(b) This numerical question was based on 'Process Costing'. The examinees 
were asked to prepare process account and income statement based on the 
given information Most of students showed lack of understanding about 
treatment of abnormal loss due to accident and damaged containers in 
process account and income statement, hence the overall performance was 
Poor. 
<<PAGE 2>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: JANUARY 2026 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
94 
Question 3.(a) This numerical question was based on 'Service Costing'. The 
requirement of this question was to calculate salary of direct professionals for 
processing of gold loan & car loan applications and total cost of processing a 
car loan application. Many examinees faced difficulty in calculation of total 
salary of direct professionals correctly based on the assumption given in 
question that cost of processing a car loan application is same as a gold loan 
application. Overall performance of the examinees was Below Average.  
(b) This numerical question was based on 'Batch Costing'. The requirement 
of the question was to calculate total cost per training batch, minimum 
training fee per trainee in a batch to cover costs and calculation of minimum 
percentage of batch size to be filled to meet required profit margin. Many 
students failed to calculate the total cost batch correctly, resulting in wrong 
calculation in later steps. Overall performance of the examinees was Average. 
Question 4.(a) This numerical question was based on 'Standard Costing'. 
The requirement of this question was to calculate direct material usage 
variance, direct material price variance, direct labour efficiency variance, direct 
labour rate varia variable overhead cost variance. Overall, Above Average 
performance was observed.  
(b) This numerical question was based on ‘Cost Accounting System’. The 
question required the ascertainment of profit as per cost accounts by 
preparing cost sheet and a statement showing reconciliation of profits as per 
cost and financial accounts Most of the students showed lack of conceptual 
understanding about absorption of fixed overheads on the basis of normal 
production capacity. Hence, overall performance of the examinees was Below 
Average.  
Question 5.(a) This numerical question was based on ‘Overheads- 
Absorption Costing Method’. The requirement of this question was to 
calculate total amount of annual insurance premium. Many students failed to 
calculate paid hours and effective machine hours correctly. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Below Average.  
(b) This numerical question was based on 'Budget and Budgetary Control'. 
The requirement of this question was to calculate actual hours worked, 
Standard hours for actual output. Standard capacity usage ratio, Actual usage 
of budgeted capacity ratio. Many students failed to calculate standard hours 
and budgeted hours correctly, leading to wrong calculation of ratios. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Below Average.  
<<PAGE 3>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
95 
(c) This theoretical question was based on ‘Marginal Costing'. The 
requirement of the question was to compute the opportunity cost for each of 
the product. Many students showed lack of understanding about concept of 
opportunity cost and calculated answer based on market demand & 
production capacity both without considering the concept that lower of the 
two should be taken for arriving at correct possible contribution for each 
product. Overall performance of the examinees was Average. 
Question 6.(a) This theoretical question was based on 'Introduction to 
Cost and Management Accounting'. The requirement of this question was to 
classify the items of expenses by functions and variability Most of the 
examinees answered on the correct lines. Overall performance of the 
examinees was Good.  
(b) This theoretical question was based on 'Employee Cost'. The requirement 
of this question was to recommend a suitable incentive scheme for factory 
workers based on the specific conditions provided in the case However, most 
students were unable to justify their choice with appropriate reasoning. They 
failed to clearly explain why the selected incentive scheme was most suitable 
under the given circumstances. Overall performance of the examinees was 
Below Average.  
(c) This theoretical question was based on 'Activity Based Costing'. The 
requirement of this question was to discuss the usefulness/suitability of 
Activity based costing. Overall performance of the examinees was Poor. 
OR 
This theoretical question was based on 'Budget and Budgetary Control'. The 
requirement of this question was to discuss the four components of Budgetary 
control system. Overall performance of the examinees was Poor.  
PAPER – 5: AUDITING AND ETHICS 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a) Responsibilities 
of 
the 
Engagement 
Partner 
(Overall 
Direction, Supervision and Review): Many examinees either omitted this 
portion entirely or provided only vague and generic statements without 
clearly explaining the engagement partner’s role in directing, supervising, and 
reviewing the audit. Answers often lacked coverage of key aspects such as 
<<PAGE 4>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: JANUARY 2026 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
96 
responsibility 
for 
ensuring 
compliance 
with 
professional 
standards, 
appropriateness of the auditor’s report, sufficiency of audit evidence, timely 
review of audit documentation and the need for consultation on complex or 
contentious matters.  
Specific Responsibilities relating to EQCR: A few examinees were unclear 
about the applicability of EQCR, particularly its mandatory requirement for 
listed entities and conditional applicability for others. In some cases, 
examinees did not mention critical aspects such as the prohibition on dating 
the auditor’s report before completion of EQCR and the requirement to 
resolve differences of opinion in accordance with firm policies.  
(b)  Identification 
of 
Engagement 
Standards 
and 
difference 
between 
reasonable and limited assurance engagements.  
Some examinees did not correctly classify the nature of the engagements, 
particularly confusing assurance engagements with related services and 
incorrectly quoting the applicable standards. In part (i), a few examinees did 
not clearly recognise that the engagement falls under SRS 4410 (Revised). In 
part (ii), some examinees either mentioned an incorrect standard or were 
unable to recall SAE 3400. 
In respect of part (iii), while most of the examinees attempted the distinction, 
many answers lacked clarity and proper structuring. examinees often stated 
generic differences without clearly bringing out the level of assurance, nature 
and extent of procedures, and form of conclusion. In several cases, examples 
were either incorrect or not provided.  
(c)  SA 501 – Letter of specific inquiry to external legal counsel and 
auditor’s 
responsibility 
where 
management 
refuses 
to 
permit 
communication: Many examinees did not include all essential components of 
the letter of specific inquiry, particularly omitting points relating to 
management’s assessment of the outcome of litigation and the request to the 
external legal counsel to comment on the reasonableness of such assessment.  
With regard to the auditor’s responsibility where management refuses 
permission, many answers lacked clarity and completeness. In some cases, 
examinees did not specifically refer to modification of opinion under SA 705, 
while others did not properly link the inability to obtain sufficient appropriate 
audit evidence with the requirement for modification. 
<<PAGE 5>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
97 
Question 2.(a) SA 
580 
– 
Matters 
to 
be 
included 
in 
Written 
Representation Letter by key Management Personnel relating to the 
Financial Statements: Examinees lacked adequate awareness of the specific 
contents of written representations relating to the financial statements as 
required under SA 580. Many examinees did not mention key representations 
such as management’s responsibility for the preparation of financial 
statements, reasonableness of accounting estimates, completeness of related 
party disclosures, and treatment of subsequent events. 
Instead, a significant number of examinees referred to generic matters, such 
as access to information, completeness of records, or internal control systems, 
which were not directly relevant to the requirement. In several cases, answers 
lacked precision and did not clearly link the representations to the financial 
statements. 
(b)  Performing 
procedures 
regarding 
the 
Continuance 
of 
Client 
Relationships and Audit Engagements: Some examinees did not clearly 
identify the three specific circumstances in which such procedures are 
required, namely: before accepting a new client, when deciding on 
continuance of an existing engagement, and when considering acceptance of 
a new engagement with an existing client. Few examinees also omitted key 
considerations such as evaluation of management integrity, assessment of the 
firm’s competence and communication with the predecessor auditor in case of 
initial engagements. 
(c)  Reporting requirement under clause 3(ii)(a) of CARO 2020 - Physical 
verification of inventories: Many examinees referred only to selective 
aspects of the provision and did not comprehensively cover all elements 
including reporting on the reasonableness of the intervals, adequacy of 
procedures, and treatment of discrepancies. 
Some examinees incorrectly stated that discrepancies of 10% or more arising 
during “revaluation” of inventory were required to be reported, reflecting a 
misunderstanding of the provision, which actually relates to discrepancies 
noticed on physical verification. 
In the conclusion, a significant number of examinees focused on 
management’s responsibilities or justified the use of systems such as ERP, 
instead of clearly addressing the auditor’s reporting responsibility in cases 
where physical verification of inventory has not been conducted. 
<<PAGE 6>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: JANUARY 2026 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
98 
Question 3.(a) SA 
706 
Emphasis 
of 
Matter 
Paragraph 
and 
the 
circumstances in which EOM may be necessary: While many examinees 
were able to identify the requirement of including an EOM paragraph, a 
number of them incorrectly referred to Other Matter or Key Audit Matter 
paragraphs, indicating a lack of clarity in distinguishing among these 
concepts. Further, the examples cited by examinees were often too general or 
inappropriate. Instances such as non-applicability of going concern, general 
litigations, or non-compliance with accounting policies were mentioned, 
instead of more specific circumstances like exceptional litigation, significant 
subsequent events, or early adoption of accounting standards.  
(c)  Understanding and evaluating automated environment for planning 
and effective audit performance: Many examinees did not address the 
specific considerations that an auditor should understand and evaluate, 
instead they discussed general aspects such as password controls, general IT 
controls and risks arising from the use of IT systems. Even where relevant 
points were identified, answers were not properly written, with examinees 
merely listing key terms without adequate explanation or proper elaboration. 
In several cases, answers did not clearly link the understanding of the 
automated environment with audit planning and effective performance of 
audit. 
Question 4.(a)  Misstatement in the financial statements - Meaning and 
Examples: While most of the examinees were able to explain the meaning, 
many did not support their answers with appropriate and relevant examples. 
In several cases, examinees did not properly analyse the specific situation 
given in the question, namely the incorrect treatment of capital expenditure as 
revenue expenditure and did not clearly conclude that it constitutes a 
misstatement. Further, adequate reasoning for such classification was often 
missing. Some examinees also provided generic or unrelated examples 
indicating a lack of clarity in applying the concept of misstatement to practical 
scenarios. 
(b)  Property, Plant and Equipment(PPE) Recognition Criteria and 
elements of cost at the time of recognition: examinees exhibited several 
common deficiencies while attempting this question. Majority of examinees 
focused only on the elements of cost and that too in a partial manner, while 
completely omitting the recognition criteria for Property, Plant and Equipment 
(PPE). Many examinees did not correctly analyse the specific expenses given in 
<<PAGE 7>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
99 
the question. Some examinees incorrectly treated inauguration expenses as 
part of the cost of PPE indicating  lack of understanding of directly 
attributable costs. Others did not provide proper reasoning for including 
testing costs as part of the asset. 
(c)  Specific Requirements of SQC-1: Many examinees were unable to clearly 
explain the mechanisms required to ensure compliance with independence 
requirements and either omitted these aspects or provided vague and generic 
responses. 
There was significant confusion regarding the applicability of Engagement 
Quality Control Review (EQCR), with some examinees incorrectly stating its 
applicability or failing to distinguish between listed and other entities. Further, 
a number of examinees were unclear about the requirement of obtaining 
written confirmations of independence, particularly with respect to the 
prescribed periodicity and the personnel from whom such confirmations were 
required. 
Question 5.(a)  SA 560 Subsequent Events – Auditor’s Responsibilities 
after the financial statements have been issued: Many examinees provided 
incomplete or fragmented procedures and did not present the steps in a clear 
and logical sequence. In several cases, key aspects such as discussion with 
management and those charged with governance, evaluation of the need for 
amendment and audit procedures on the amended financial statements were 
either omitted or inadequately explained. 
Further, examinees often lacked clarity in explaining the reporting 
implications, particularly the requirement to issue a new auditor’s report and 
the circumstances in which a modified opinion or Emphasis of Matter/Other 
Matter paragraph may be required. Some examinees also did not address the 
auditor’s course of action where management did not take appropriate steps 
including the need to prevent reliance on the auditor’s report.  
(b)  Audit procedures for verification of receipt of income of NGO: Most 
of the examinees did not specify the verification procedures applicable to 
each particular category of income. Instead of outlining the audit or 
verification steps relevant to different types of receipts, they merely listed the 
various sources of income of the NGO without elaboration. 
In several cases, examinees did not distinguish between various types of 
receipts such as grants, subscriptions, membership fees and fundraising 
<<PAGE 8>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: JANUARY 2026 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
100 
collections  and therefore failed to provide tailored procedures for each. Some 
answers also lacked clarity and depth, with examinees not referring to relevant 
checks such as verification with registers, agreements, bank deposits, or 
statutory requirements like compliance with the Foreign Contribution 
(Regulation) Act. 
(c)  Audit Planning- Discussion with senior members of the audit team 
and the management: A large number of examinees did not comprehend the 
specific requirements and instead discussed general aspects and benefits of 
audit planning, such as allocation of resources, use of experts, and timely 
completion of the audit, which were not directly relevant. Many examinees did 
not specifically address the two scenarios given in the question and could not 
apply the provisions of SA 300 in context. In several cases, answers lacked 
clarity regarding the requirement of involvement of the engagement partner 
and key team members in planning, as well as the permissibility of discussing 
elements of the audit plan with management subject to safeguards. 
Further, a significant number of examinees did not provide clear and 
appropriate conclusions for each part, particularly in evaluating whether the 
views expressed by Mr. Hardik were justified or not.  
Question 6.(a)  Asset Classification and Provisioning - Doubtful and Loss 
Assets: Many examinees focused primarily on computation of provision and 
did not explicitly state or evaluate the correctness of asset classification, 
particularly in the first case. Some examinees did not clearly distinguish 
between secured and unsecured portions while calculating provisioning or 
applied incorrect percentages. In a few instances, the concept of erosion in 
the value of security was either overlooked or incorrectly applied, leading to 
improper classification in the second case. 
(b)  Circumstances under which less of the work of the Internal audit 
function be used: While some examinees were able to state a few relevant 
points, many answers were incomplete and lacked comprehensive coverage of 
the circumstances. A significant number of examinees misinterpreted the 
requirement of the question and instead discussed the circumstances under 
which the external auditor may use or rely on the work of the internal audit 
function, rather than focusing on situations requiring reduced reliance and 
increased direct audit effort. 
<<PAGE 9>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
101 
In several cases, examinees did not clearly bring out key factors such as higher 
degree of judgment, increased risk of material misstatement, lack of 
objectivity, and lower competence of the internal audit function.  
(c)  Examination of the various rules, regulations and orders issued by 
the executive authorities: A large number of examinees did not attempt this 
alternative, 
and 
those 
who 
attempted 
it 
demonstrated 
inadequate 
understanding of the specific requirements. Many examinees provided generic 
answers relating to broad aspects of expenditure audit instead of addressing 
the specific considerations involved in examining rules, regulations, and 
orders issued by executive authorities. In several cases, examinees did not 
mention key checks such as consistency with the Constitution and laws, 
conformity with C&AG requirements, absence of conflict with higher 
authorities and the necessity of proper rule-making authority. 
PAPER  − 6: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT & STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
SECTION A – FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a) This was a numerical question based on “Ratio Analysis”  
requiring calculation of Closing Inventory, Working Capital, Basic Defense 
Interval. Overall performance was Average.  
(b) This was a numerical question based on “Management of Working 
Capital” to calculate effective cost of factoring and advise on acceptance of 
factoring proposal. The performance of the examinees was Below Average. 
(c) This was a numerical question based on “Dividend Decision”  requiring 
examinees to calculate price of equity share and number of shares using 
Gordon’s model. They are also required to calculate price using MM 
hypothesis and amount of earning required. The performance of the 
examinees was Average.  
Question 2.(a) This was a numerical question based on “Leverage”  required 
calculation of EBIT, combined leverage, level of sales where EBIT will be zero. 
The performance of the examinees was Good.   
(b) This was a numerical question based on “Investment Decision” requiring 
examinees to calculate the average rate of return and NPV . The performance 
of the examinees was above Average.  
<<PAGE 10>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: JANUARY 2026 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
102 
Question 3.(a) This was a numerical question which required examinees to 
estimate the amount of external fund required and determine the sources and 
composition of the fund to meet the requirement. Overall performance was 
Below Average.  
(b) This was a theoretical question based on “Leverage”. Examinees were 
required to explain in what ways financial leverage operates as a "double 
edged sword". The performance of the examinees was Poor.  
Question 4.(a) This was a theoretical question based on “Type of Financing” 
to discuss briefly the key features of seed capital assistance as a source of 
finance. The performance of the examinees was Poor. 
(b) This was a theoretical question based on “Management of Working 
Capital”, examinees were required to explain why the Virtual banking service is 
popular among the customers and discuss the advantages of Virtual Banking. 
The performance of the examinees was Above Average.  
(c) This 
was 
a 
theoretical 
question 
on 
“Introduction 
to 
Financial 
Management” examinees were asked to define financial distress and briefly 
explain the consequences of a prolonged financial distress. The performance 
of the examinees was Average. 
OR 
This was a theoretical question on “Ratio Analysis” requiring the examinees to 
comment on the current ratio under given transactions. The performance of 
the examinees who attempted the question was Above Average.  
SECTION – B: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
Specific Comments 
Question 5.(a)  The overall performance was average. A considerable 
number of examinees were unable to correctly identify the Strategic Group 
Mapping tool. Even among those who identified it correctly, many could not 
clearly articulate the procedural steps involved in implementing the tool. The 
responses generally lacked depth, structure and conceptual clarity. 
(b)  The performance was above average. Examinees were largely able to 
correctly identify the Turnaround Strategy and explain its implementation 
stages effectively. The overall conceptual understanding appeared satisfactory. 
<<PAGE 11>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
103 
(c)  The performance was average. While most examinees were able to 
identify the analysis as Competitor Analysis/Competitive Landscape Analysis, 
they were unable to systematically explain the steps involved in assessing the 
competitive landscape. The responses were often vague, unstructured and 
lacked conceptual precision. 
Question 6.(a) The performance was poor. A majority of examinees were 
unable to correctly explain the concept of Corporate Culture. Further, there 
was limited understanding regarding the sources from which corporate 
culture originates. 
(b)  The performance was average. Although most examinees defined the Cost 
Leadership Strategy, they were unable to clearly explain its key conditions and 
associated disadvantages. The answers were largely generic and lacked 
analytical depth. 
Question 7.(a)  The performance was poor. Many examinees demonstrated 
limited understanding of Strategic Performance Measures and were unable to 
explain the relevant factors, as well as their significance in selecting 
appropriate measures. 
(b)  The performance was average. Examinees were unable to clearly explain 
that what an innovation offers to an organisation, along with the associated 
risks. The responses lacked depth and conceptual clarity. 
Question 8.(a)  The performance was average. While most examinees could 
identify the market areas where competitive pressures operate, the 
explanations were not adequately linked to the competitive pressure. 
(b)  The performance in the first option was good, with examinees effectively 
highlighting the characteristics of ideal objectives. However, in the second 
option, performance was average due to an inadequate understanding of the 
concept of Strategy.  
 
