<<PAGE 1>>
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE EXAMINEES 
PAPER – 4: COST AND MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a)  This numerical question was based on ‘Marginal costing’ 
requiring calculation of minimum number of units to be sold to maintain the 
same per unit profit. Most of the examinees could not calculate variable cost 
per unit, fixed cost and hence failed to proceed further to calculate minimum 
number of units to be sold. Overall performance of the examinees was Below 
Average. 
(b) This numerical question was based on  ‘Joint products and by products’
requiring calculation of profit/loss for each product based on given data,
apportionment of joint cost to the respective products using Net realizable
value method and also advising on whether the largest selling product is
profitable or loss making. Most of the examinees were not able to calculate
the profits based on NRV method. Overall performance of the examinees was
Above Average.
(c) This numerical question was based on ‘Employee cost’ . Question requires
calculation of employee turnover rate using replacement method and flux
method. Most of the examinees answered on the correct lines and the overall
performance of the examinees was Good.
Question 2.(a)  In this question examinees were required to prepare ‘Cost 
Sheet’, highlighting the various elements of cost, and examining examinees’ 
understanding of the weighted average method for apportionment of labour 
cost to each product. A significant number of examinees failed to approach 
the question correctly, which was the primary reason for the Below Average 
performance. 
(b) This numerical question was based on ‘Employee Cost’ requiring
computation of the effective hourly rate of earnings, savings in direct labour
cost per unit for the company and improvement in labour efficiency following
the implementation of the Halsey and Rowan incentive schemes. Many
examinees were unable to align their recommendations with the specific
requirement of ensuring a 15% increase in workers’ earnings as required in
the question. Instead, they based their selection of the scheme primarily on
©The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
<<PAGE 2>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
95 
the potential savings for the company. As a result, Average performance was 
observed.  
Question 3.(a)  This numerical question was based on ‘Activity Based 
costing’ which required calculation of costs allocated to each product from 
each activity and cost of unused capacity for each activity. Most of the 
examinees answered on the correct line and the overall performance was 
Good. 
(b)  This numerical question was based on ‘Service Costing’ requiring 
calculation of ticket prices of three types of seats. Some examinees failed to 
align all the parameters required in the question and could not apply the 
concept of equivalent units correctly. Overall performance of the examinees 
was Average. 
Question 4.(a)  This numerical question was based on ‘Cost accounting 
system’ which required preparation of reconciliation statement taking net loss 
as per cost accounts as base and find out the excess material consumption. 
Overall performance of the examinees was Good. 
(b)  This numerical question was based on ‘Standard Costing’ which required 
the calculation of Variable overhead variance, Fixed overhead variance, Fixed 
overhead expenditure variance, Fixed overhead volume variance and Fixed 
overhead calendar variance. Overall performance of the examinees was Above 
Average. 
Question 5.(a)  This numerical question was based on ‘Process and operation 
costing’ requiring  calculation of Equivalent units of production for material 
and moulding cost and the cost of closing work-in-process (WIP) and finished 
products. Overall performance of the examinees was Average. 
(b)  This theoretical question was based on ‘Unit and batch costing’ requiring 
examinees to distinguish between ‘Job costing and Batch Costing’. Overall 
performance of the examinees was Average. 
(c)  This question was based on ‘Budget and Budgetary Control’ which 
required the preparation of flexible budget estimating the total cost for a trip 
for various levels and computing the average cost per examinee at each level. 
Overall performance of the examinees was Average. 
©The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
<<PAGE 3>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: MAY 2025 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
96 
Question 6.(a)  This theoretical question was based on ‘Introduction to Cost 
and Management Accounting’ requiring examinees to identify the type of cost 
and state the relevant / non-relevant in managerial decision making for the 
given independent situations. Overall performance of the examinees was 
Below Average. 
(b)  This theoretical question was based on ‘Activity Based Costing’ requiring 
examinees to classify the cost pool as per cost hierarchy i.e. unit level, batch 
level, product level and facility level. Overall performance of the examinees 
was Below Average. 
(c)  This theoretical question was based on ‘Process and Operation Costing’ 
requiring examinees to describe the methods for valuation of work-in-process 
followed in Process costing. Overall performance of the examinees was Poor. 
Or 
This theoretical question was based on ‘Introduction to Cost and Management 
Accounting’ requiring examine to contemplate the list of functions given and 
identify each of them with the most relevant scope of Cost Accounting. 
Overall performance of the examinees was Poor.   
PAPER – 5: AUDITING AND ETHICS 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a)  Meaning of term "available" and way of selecting the 
most appropriate audit evidence when testing the accuracy of any 
assertion to form any opinion:  Many examinees failed to understand the 
requirement of the question and could not explain the meaning of the term 
'Available’ and were unable to state the reasoning for the correct conclusion 
given. They also failed to mention monthly accounts statement or balance 
confirmation as evidence for verification of assertion about book debts. In the 
second part, they were unable to explain that the most appropriate evidence 
for evaluating an assertion can be obtained by expert knowledge and 
experience, prior knowledge of what evidence is reasonably available, etc. 
(b)  Types of controls in an automated environment and its identification: 
Most of the examinees could not correctly categorise the controls in an 
©The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
<<PAGE 4>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
97 
automated environment. However, they were able to identify the correct type 
of controls against the given areas. 
(c)  Meaning 
and 
Significance 
of 
Completion 
Memorandum 
and 
Assembly of the Final Audit file: Majority of the examinees correctly 
mentioned the meaning of Completion Memorandum but were unable to 
explain the significance of it properly. 
Question 2.(a)  Engagement and Quality Control Standards and their 
purpose: Many examinees had fair knowledge about the names of the 
Engagement and Quality Control Standards, however, they could not explain 
them correctly. Further majority of the examinees were unable to explain the 
purpose of issue of those standards.  
(c) Reporting responsibility of the Auditor under Para 3 Clause (x) of 
CARO 2020: Majority of the examinees lacked correct knowledge of reporting 
responsibility of the auditor under the above-mentioned clause. Some 
examinees have explained the reporting requirement in the case of borrowing 
on loan taken under clause (ix). 
Answer 3.(a)  
Audit procedures for verification of "measurement" 
assertion for sales: Most of the examinees wrote about the verification 
process of sales in general and the points with respect to carrying out test of 
controls for checking the effectiveness of internal control over sales and failed 
to understand the requirement of the question related to the verification for 
the measurement assertion for sales.  
Answer 4.(c)  
Test of controls for effectiveness of internal control over 
sales as a part of debtor's audit procedures: Except a few, most of the 
examinees have lacked the knowledge of the topic and have written general 
answers with respect to vouching of debtors. Examinees focused on the test of 
details rather than the test of controls which was required in the question. 
Answer 5.(b)  
Other Written Representations: Majority of the examinee 
answered the question assuming it to be written representations that the 
management needs to provide but did not mention the correct points as 
regards to "Other Representations which may supplement but do not form 
part of the written representations relating to management's responsibilities 
and preparation of financial statements. 
©The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
<<PAGE 5>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: MAY 2025 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
98 
Answer 6.(b)  
Areas to be covered in verifying the internal control 
mechanism of Multiplex Cinema: Many examinees explained the internal 
control mechanism of an organisation, rather than answering the specific 
context of a cinema hall as required by the question.  
(c)  Disclosures 
regarding 
CSR 
activities 
made 
in 
"Additional 
Information" to Notes to Account : A few examinees have explained the 
audit procedures instead of writing about the verification of the disclosure 
requirements. 
PAPER  − 6: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT & STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
SECTION A – FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Specific Comments 
Question 1.(a)  This was a numerical question based on “Ratio Analysis” 
requiring preparation of Balance Sheet. Overall performance was Above 
Average .  
(b) This was a numerical question based on “Dividend Decision” with some 
requirement’s based on  Gordon’s Model. The overall performance of the 
examinees was Poor in this question. 
(c) This was a numerical question based on “Leverage” requiring preparation 
of Income Statement and some other requirements. The performance of the 
examinees was Below Average.  
Question 2.(a) This was a numerical question based on “cost of capital “  
requiring calculation of cost of equity share capital, cost of preference shares, 
cost of debentures and Interest rate on bank loan. The overall performance of 
the examinees was Below Average.   
(b) This was a numerical question based on “Dividend Decision” requiring 
examinees to calculate the minimum and maximum share price using Walter’s 
Model. The performance of the examinees was Above Average.  
Question 3.(a) This was a numerical question based on “Investment 
Decision.” which required examinees to calculate the Initial Investment, Net 
Present Value (NPV), Profitability Index (PI), Discounted payback and MIRR. 
Overall performance was Average.  
©The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
<<PAGE 6>>
 
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
99 
(b) This was a numerical question on “Capital Structure” as per MM 
Approach. The performance of the examinees was Below Average.  
Question 4.(a) This was a theoretical question on “Introduction to Financial 
Management” to explain the agency cost. The performance of the examinees 
was Poor. 
(b) This was a theoretical question on “Type of Financing” to explain the 
features of bridge financing. The performance of the examinees was Average.  
(c) This was a theoretical question on “Capital Structure” related to Pecking 
Order theory. The performance of the examinees was Average. 
OR 
This was a theoretical question based on “Analysis of Combined Leverage”. 
The question was attempted by very few examinees. The performance of the 
examinees who attempted the question was Above Average.  
SECTION – B: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
Specific Comments 
Question 5.(a)  The overall performance was average. Many examinees were 
unable to correctly identify the strategic intent. As a result, their responses 
lacked appropriate explanation of its meaning, importance and essential 
elements. 
(b)  The performance was poor. Most of the examinees either did not attempt 
the question or incorrectly identified the strategy in question. Consequently, 
the second part of the response was misdirected and failed to meet the 
expectations. 
(c)  The performance was average. Examinees were generally able to identify 
retrenchment strategies correctly and adequately explained the rationale for 
adopting the divestment strategy. 
Question 6.(a)  The performance was below average. Due to inadequate 
conceptual understanding, most examinees either did not attempt the 
question or failed to properly explain the importance of values. Their 
responses lacked relevant examples and did not clearly differentiate values 
from intent. 
©The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
<<PAGE 7>>
 
INTERMEDIATE EXAMINATION: MAY 2025 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWER 
100 
(b)  The performance was good. Most examinees could correctly explain the 
key characteristics of resources and capabilities, demonstrating conceptual 
clarity. 
Question 7.(a)  The performance was above average. Many examinees were 
able to correctly identify and explain the support activities in the value chain, 
even though some lacked depth in understanding the overall concept. 
(b)  The performance was above average. Examinees generally demonstrated 
a sound understanding of the Differentiation Strategy and were able to 
explain its major bases and supporting strategies effectively. 
Question 8.(a)  The performance was below average. Due to lack of 
conceptual clarity, most examinees struggled to correctly explain the meaning 
and role of Key Success Factors in business. 
(b)  The overall performance was below average. In the first option, examinees 
displayed poor understanding of the expansion strategy, resulting in 
inadequate and incomplete responses. However, in the second option, while a 
few examinees referred to leadership roles in strategy execution, most were 
unable to interpret the statement correctly, leading to weak and poorly 
structured responses. 
 
©The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
