<<PAGE 1>>
1 
Mock Test Paper - Series II: December, 2024 
Date of Paper: 14th December, 2024 
Time of Paper: 2 P.M. to 5 P.M. 
 
INTERMEDIATE GROUP – II  
PAPER – 6A : FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT & STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
PAPER 6A: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Time Allowed – 3 Hours (Total time for 6A and 6B)  
Maximum Marks – 50 
1. 
The question paper comprises two parts, Part I and Part II. 
2. 
Part I comprises Case Scenario based Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs) 
3. 
Part II comprises questions which require descriptive type answers. 
4. 
Working note should form part of the answer. Wherever necessary, suitable 
assumptions may be made by the candidates and disclosed by way of note. 
However, in answers to Questions in Division A, working notes are not 
required. 
PART I – Case Scenario based MCQs (15 Marks) 
Write the most appropriate answer to each of the following multiple choice 
questions by choosing one of the four options given. All questions are 
compulsory. 
Case Scenario I: 
MNP Ltd. is a multinational company having its operations spread mostly in India 
and neighbouring countries of India. The promotors of the company believed that 
capital structure of a company must be kept flexible and balanced, where proper 
mix should always be maintained between debt and equity. Such mix of debt and 
equity should be reviewed from time to time keeping in mind the changing situation 
of India and the global scenario.  
The capital structure of MNP Ltd. is as under: 
9% Debentures  
Rs.   2,75,000 
11% Preference shares  
Rs.   2,25,000 
Equity shares (face value: Rs. 10 per share)  
Rs.   5,00,000 
Total capital of the company  
Rs. 10,00,000 
The following are some of the additional information provided by MNP Ltd. relating 
to the above mentioned capital structure.  
(i)  
Rs. 100 per debenture redeemable at par has 2% floatation cost and 10 years 
of maturity. The market price per debenture is Rs. 105. 
(ii)  Rs. 100 per preference share redeemable at par has 3% floatation cost and 
10 years of maturity. The market price per preference share is Rs. 106. 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 2>>
2 
(iii)  Equity share has Rs. 4 floatation cost and market price per share of Rs. 24. 
The next year expected dividend is Rs. 2 per share with an annual growth of 
5%. The firm has a practice of paying all earnings in the form of dividends. 
(iv)  Corporate Income-tax rate is 35%. 
Since the company is a multinational company market value weights are preferred 
over book value weights when calculating the Weighted Average Cost of Capital 
(WACC) for several reasons. The company believes that market values reflect the 
current market perception of a company's financial health and future prospects. 
This is more relevant for calculating the cost of capital today, as investors base 
their decisions on current market conditions. Book values, based on historical 
accounting principles, may not accurately represent the true economic value of the 
company's capital components. Market values capture the actual cost that a 
company would incur if it were to raise new capital in the current market. Book 
values might not reflect the true cost of debt due to factors like changes in interest 
rates or creditworthiness. Similarly, book value of equity might not reflect the 
current investor expectations for future dividends and growth. Market values are 
readily available through stock prices and market interest rates. Obtaining accurate 
book values, especially for intangible assets, can be a complex and time-
consuming process. 
On the basis of this information provided above you are required to answer the 
following MCQs (1 to 5): 
1.  
Calculate the cost of equity and choose the correct answer from the following? 
(a)  14% 
(b)  15% 
(c)  16% 
(d)  17% 
2.  
Calculate the cost of debt and choose the correct answer from the following? 
(a)  6.11% 
(b)  5.48% 
(c)  9% 
(d)  10.55% 
3.  
Calculate the cost of preference shares and choose the correct answer from 
the following? 
(a)  10.57 % 
(b)  5.11% 
(c)  9% 
(d)  10% 
4.  
Calculate the WACC using market value weights and choose the correct 
answer from the following? 
(a)  12.80 % 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 3>>
3 
(b)  5.11% 
(c)  9% 
(d)  10.55% 
5.  
What will be the current market price of MNP Ltd.’s equity shares if Ke = 10%, 
expected dividend is Rs. 2 per share and annual growth rate is 5% from the 
following options: 
(a)  40 per share 
(b)  20 per share 
(c)  30 per share 
(d)  45 per share 
 (5 x 2 = 10 Marks) 
6. 
EBIT 
= 4,00,000 
EBT 
= 3,00,000   
Sales  = 16,00,000 
Which of the following is / are correct? 
1. 
DFL is 1.33 
2. 
Interest coverage ratio is 3 
3. 
Operating profit margin is 25% 
Select the correct answer using the code given below: 
(a) 
1, 2 and 3 
(b) 
1 and 2 only 
(c) 
1 and 3 only 
(d) 
3 only 
(2 Marks) 
7. 
If velocity of stock is 3 months, annual sales amount to Rs.6 lakh at 20% gross 
profit margin and opening stock is Rs.90,000; what is the closing stock value? 
(a) 
Rs. 90,000 
(b) 
Rs. 70,000 
(c) 
Rs. 1,50,000 
(d) 
Rs. 1,00,000 
(2 Marks) 
8.  
Margin of safety is affected if: 
1. 
P/V ratio changes 
2. 
Fixed cost changes 
3. 
Volume of sales changes 
(a) 
1 only 
(b) 
1 and 2 only 
(c) 
2 and 3 only 
(d) 
1, 2 and 3 
(1 Mark) 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 4>>
4 
PART II – Descriptive Questions (35 Marks) 
Question No. 1 is compulsory. 
Attempt any two questions out of the remaining three questions. 
1. 
(a)  The financial statement and operating results of Alpha Limited revealed 
the following position as on 31st March, 2023: 
— 
Equity share capital (Rs. 10 fully 
paid share) 
Rs. 20,00,000 
— 
Working capital 
Rs.  6,00,000 
— 
Bank overdraft 
Rs.  1,00,000 
— 
Current ratio 
           2.5 : 1 
— 
Liquidity ratio 
1.5 : 1 
— 
Proprietary ratio (Net fixed 
assets/Proprietary fund) 
.75 : 1 
— 
Cost of sales 
Rs. 14,40,000 
— 
Debtors velocity 
2 months 
— 
Stock turnover based on cost of 
sales 
4 times 
— 
Gross profit ratio 
20% of sales 
— 
Net profit ratio 
15% of sales  
Closing stock was 25% higher than the opening stock. There were also 
free reserves brought forward from earlier years. Current assets include 
stock, debtors and cash only. The current liabilities expect bank overdraft 
treated as creditors. 
Expenses include depreciation of Rs. 90,000. 
 
The following information was collected from the records for the year 
ended 31st March, 2024: 
— Total sales for the year were 20% higher as compared to previous 
year. 
— Balances as on 31st March, 2024 were : Stock Rs. 5,20,000, 
Creditors Rs. 4,15,000, Debtors Rs. 4,95,000 and Cash balance 
Rs. 3,10,000. 
— Percentage of Gross profit on turnover has gone up from 20% to 
25% and ratio of net profit to sales from 15% to 16%. 
— A portion of Fixed assets was very old (book values Rs. 1,80,000)  
disposed for Rs. 90,000. (No depreciations to be provided on this 
item). 
— Long-term investments were purchased for Rs. 2,96,600. 
— Bank overdraft fully discharged. 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 5>>
5 
— Percentage of depreciation to Fixed assets to be provided at the 
rate in the previous year. 
 
PREPARE Balance Sheet as on 31st March, 2023 and 31st March, 2024. 
 
(5 Marks) 
(b)   Theta Limited is expecting an annual earning of Rs. 3 Lakhs before 
paying any interest and taxes. The company has Rs. 10 lakhs of 10% 
debentures in its capital structure. The capitalisation rate is 12.5%. You 
are required to calculate the value of Theta Limited as per the NI 
approach. Also, COMPUTE the overall cost of capital. 
(5 Marks) 
(c)  The following data relates to Beta Limited:  
 
 
Rs. 
 
Sales 
 2,00,000 
 
Less: Variable Expenses (30%) 
 60,000 
 
Contribution  
1,40,000 
 
Fixed operating expenses 
1,00,000 
 
EBIT  
40,000 
 
Less: Interest 
  5,000 
 
EBT 
35,000 
(i)  
CALCULATE by what percentage will EBT increase if sales increases 
by 6 percent. 
 
(ii)  CALCULATE by what percentage will EBIT increase if there is 10 per 
cent increase in sales?  
(iii)  CALCULATE by what percentage EBT increase if EBIT increases by 
6 per cent? 
(5 Marks) 
2. 
(a)  ABC Ltd., a newly formed company has applied to the Private Bank for 
the first time for financing it’s Working Capital Requirements. The 
following information is available about the projections for the current 
year: Estimated Level of Activity Completed Units of Production 31,200. 
Raw Material Cost 
Rs 40 per unit 
Direct Wages Cost 
Rs 25 per Unit 
Overhead 
Rs 40 per Unit (Incl Rs 10 of 
Depreciation) 
Selling Price 
Rs 150 per unit 
GP Ratio (Cash Cost) 
30%  
Net Profit Ratio 
25% (On Total cost) 
Raw Material in Stock 
Avg of 30 days consumption 
Work in Progress Stock at 30% of FG 
Produced Units 
**Valued at Prime Cost 
Material – 90% into process 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 6>>
6 
 
Relevant Conversion Cost – 
60% completed 
Finished Goods Stock 
2,500 units 
Credit Allowed by the supplier 
30 Days 
Credit Allowed to Purchasers 
45 Days 
Direct Wages [Lag in payment] 
15 Days 
Expected Cash Balance 
1,25,000 
 
Safety margin is to be kept at 15% of the net working capital required 
inclusive of the margin amount. Assume that production is carried on 
evenly throughout the year (360 days) and wages and overheads accrue 
similarly. All sales are on the credit basis. You are required to 
CALCULATE the Net Working Capital Requirement. 
(6 Marks) 
(b)  Return on Equity (ROE) is Satva Limited is 15% and the capitalization 
rate applicable to the company is at 20%. Satva Limited’s Book Value 
per share (BVPS) is Rs 125. Calculate the intrinsic value of the share 
today using Gordon’s model and Walter’s model  if the company’s policy 
is to retain 65% of the earning. 
(4 Marks) 
3.  
Hemsparsh Private Limited is globally recognized consultancy firm having its 
presence in various countries across the globe and is currently headquartered 
at Ahmedabad, India.  
It plans to commence a new branch in the Australia owing to the untapped 
opportunities available there in the outsourcing business. The company hired 
a professional for the preparation of the Project report and the fee paid was 
Rs 2,00,000. The company also incurred Rs 5,00,000 in the form R&D costs. 
As per the project report, the Company will require an initial fund outlay of Rs 
25 crores for buying property & setting up the other infrastructure. It will also 
require working capital amounting to Rs 5 crore. The company is planning to 
operate for a very long period of time, however for the sake of simplicity, 
calculations shall end at the end of the 10th year. The Earnings before tax but 
after deducting Interest Exp (EBT) estimated would be as follows –  
YEAR     EBT (Amount in Rs) 
1 
         2,00,00,000  
2 
         2,50,00,000  
3 
         4,00,00,000  
4 
         4,75,00,000  
5 
         6,00,00,000  
6 
         6,40,00,000  
7 
         6,15,00,000  
8 
         5,25,00,000  
9 
         3,80,00,000  
10 
         2,90,00,000  
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 7>>
7 
The above amounts also include an allocated common cost of Rs 12,50,000. 
Company will distribute 10% dividends every year on post-tax earnings. 
Company intends to borrow funds of 3 crores at a post-tax Interest rate of 
6.5% in India. As per the tax treaty between India & Australia (Tax Agreement 
between two nations), first 3 years are tax free and from 4th year 75% of 
corporate taxes are to be paid in the country where it is headquartered and 
balance in the other nation. Total Corporate tax rate applicable to the 
company is 30%. However, tax on capital gains is to be paid at 15%, only in 
the headquarters. Salvage value for depreciation purpose is estimated at Rs. 
90,00,000. The assets would be disposed of in the market at Rs. 3,50,00,000 
at the end. Hemsparsh Private Limited desires a premium of 3% to the current 
MCLR of 12% (Marginal Cost of Funds based Lending Rate).  Assume no 
other assets in the block. 
CALCULATE NPV for the project and advise only from Indian law perspective. 
If the company wishes to recoup its investment within 3.5 years, STATE any 
two measures that the company shall take. 
 (10 Marks) 
4.  
(a) 
EXPLAIN the difference between factoring and forfaiting  
(4 Marks) 
 
(b)  DESCRIBE some of the tasks that demonstrate the importance of good 
financial management                                   
(4 Marks) 
 
(c)  EXPLAIN the concept of Drop – Lock Bond (DL Bonds)  
(2 Marks) 
OR 
 
(c)  MENTION any one advantage of stock dividend – to the company as well 
as to the investor                                                    
(2 Marks) 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 8>>
8 
PAPER 6B: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
1. 
The question paper comprises two parts, Part I and Part II. 
2. 
Part I comprises case scenario based multiple choice questions (MCQs) 
3. 
Part II comprises questions which require descriptive type answers. 
PART I – Case scenario based MCQs (15 Marks) 
Question 1. (A) (Compulsory) 
1.  
(A)  Galaxy 
Enterprises 
Limited 
(GEL) 
operates 
as 
a 
diversified 
conglomerate with a significant presence in various industries, including 
electronics, packaged foods, textiles, heavy machinery, and renewable 
energy. Leveraging its substantial free reserves of ₹85,000 crores, GEL 
has built a strong brand reputation, largely driven by its market 
leadership across multiple sectors. 
 
In the renewable energy sector, GEL has been the industry leader for 
over 15 years. The division’s recent performance has been exceptional. 
A significant market development occurred when two competitors, Nova 
Green Energy Limited and Zenith Solar Limited – previously ranked 
second and third in market share, respectively – merged to create a new 
entity, Synergy Renewables Ltd (SRL). Following the merger, SRL has 
claimed the top spot in market share, intensifying competition. 
 
Against this backdrop, the Chairman of GEL convened a strategic 
meeting with the Board of Directors, divisional heads, marketing 
executives, and the Group CFO. The meeting focused on formulating 
growth strategies for the renewable energy division, identifying 
opportunities for diversification, and announcing an interim dividend in 
honour of GEL’s platinum jubilee celebrations. 
 
Mr. Arvind Malhotra, CEO of the renewable energy division, emphasized 
the industry's slow pace of modernization compared to global standards. 
He highlighted the potential in emerging product categories, such as 
next-generation solar panels, energy storage systems, and advanced 
wind turbines. He proposed a modernization initiative requiring an 
investment of ₹7,000 crores. This transformation is projected to reduce 
operational costs by 20% and minimize wastage by 12%. 
 
The CFO presented an analysis revealing that competitors are unlikely 
to invest in significant upgrades or expansions for the next 6–8 years 
due to financial constraints. In response, the Board approved the 
modernization initiative and allocated an additional ₹1,500 crores to 
strengthen the division's supply chain. 
 
Another proposal discussed was GEL’s entry into the electric vehicle 
(EV) segment. The Board approved this diversification strategy, 
allocating ₹8,000 crores to establish a foothold in this rapidly growing 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 9>>
9 
market. Additionally, the Board authorized the distribution of an interim 
dividend of ₹75 per share to commemorate GEL’s platinum jubilee. 
 
In preparing for these strategic initiatives, the Board also evaluated key 
stakeholders to determine their influence and interest. Shareholders and 
the Board of Directors emerged as primary stakeholders with both high 
influence and interest, necessitating active engagement to secure their 
support. Regulatory authorities were recognized as influential but less 
interested in the immediate plans, requiring regular updates to ensure 
compliance. Customers and employees, while not as powerful, were 
identified as highly interested stakeholders, particularly concerning the 
renewable energy division’s modernization and the entry into the EV 
market. 
Based on the above Case Scenario, answer the Multiple-Choice Questions. 
(i)  
GEL has approved significant investments in modernizing its renewable 
energy division and entering the electric vehicle segment. Analyze the level 
of strategy these decisions represent and identify the correct justification for 
your answer. 
(a)  Functional level, as these are related to operational improvements within 
the renewable energy division. 
(b)  Business level, as these initiatives align with the goals of a single division 
to gain a competitive edge. 
(c)  Corporate level, as they involve decisions impacting the overall portfolio 
and diversification of GEL. 
(d)  Operational level, as these focus on day-to-day activities within the 
divisions.  
(2 Marks) 
(ii)  With the merger of Nova Green Energy Limited and Zenith Solar Limited into 
Synergy Renewables Ltd (SRL), how does this development influence GEL’s 
strategic priorities in the renewable energy sector under Porter’s Five Forces 
framework? 
(a)  The merger reduces the threat of substitutes by consolidating competing 
technologies. 
(b)  It increases the bargaining power of buyers by providing them with a 
stronger alternative supplier. 
(c)  It heightens the intensity of industry rivalry by creating a stronger 
competitor with greater market share. 
(d)  The merger strengthens the bargaining power of suppliers due to greater 
reliance on key inputs. 
(2 Marks) 
(iii)  GEL’s decision to enter the EV market represents a diversification strategy. 
Evaluate which type of diversification strategy is being pursued and the 
reasoning behind this classification. 
(a)  Concentric diversification, as the EV market shares synergies with 
renewable energy technologies. 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 10>>
10 
(b)  Vertical integration, as GEL seeks to integrate upstream or downstream 
activities in the automotive value chain. 
(c)  Horizontal diversification, as GEL expands into a market unrelated to its 
existing renewable energy operations. 
(d)  Conglomerate diversification, as GEL enters an entirely unrelated and 
independent business segment. 
(2 Marks) 
(iv)  GEL identified shareholders and the Board of Directors as key stakeholders. 
Analyze the rationale for classifying them as both high influence and high 
interest and how this influences strategic communication. 
(a)  They directly impact compliance with regulatory standards, necessitating 
regular updates. 
(b) 
 Their vested interest in dividends and long-term value creation makes 
their engagement essential for approval of key initiatives. 
(c)  They represent the end consumers whose perceptions directly influence 
GEL’s market reputation. 
(d)  Their role in operational execution requires constant communication and 
support for strategy implementation. 
(2 Marks) 
(v)  By approving modernization in renewable energy and diversification into EVs, 
what corporate strategy is GEL pursuing, and how does it position the 
company as per Ansoff’s product market growth matrix? 
(a)  Cost leadership, to lower operational expenses and offer competitive 
pricing. 
(b)  Product differentiation, by leveraging innovation in both existing and new 
markets. 
(c)  Market penetration, through deeper investments in existing product 
lines. 
(d)  Market expansion and diversification, to capture growth opportunities 
across unrelated industries. 
(2 Marks) 
(B)  Compulsory Application Based Independent MCQs 
(i)  
Harish, a middle manager, is confused about the difference between flexibility 
and resilience while working around an uncertain situation in the organization. 
Can you help find the right difference between the two? 
(a) 
Flexibility is about adapting to new things quickly, while resilience is 
about holding on to the current position of the things for the short-term 
as the organisation is confident of its efficiencies. 
(b) 
Flexibility is a subset of resilience, and to be flexible means to be 
resilient. 
(c) 
Flexibility is the opposite of resilience, where, if the organisation is 
flexible, it changes and if it is resilient it doesn’t change at all. 
(d) 
Both are the same.  
(2 Marks) 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 11>>
11 
(ii) 
 Suman, the marketing head of Jalwa Music Co., was doing research on the 
online music streaming business in India for her new age music for 
youngsters. She analyzed that though the players in the market were 
innovating rapidly, it was difficult to maintain a sustainable competitive 
advantage. Which aspect of strategic management best reflects this 
challenge? 
(a)  The need for continuous innovation.  
(b)  The importance of understanding the competitive landscape.  
(c)  The dynamic and unpredictable nature of the industry.  
(d)  The difficulty in estimating competitors' responses.  
(2 Marks) 
(iii)  During which stage of the Product Life Cycle would you typically expect the 
highest marketing expenditure per unit sold as companies aggressively 
promote their product? 
(a)  Maturity 
(b)  Introduction 
(c)  Growth 
(d)  Decline 
(1 Mark) 
PART II – Descriptive Questions (35 Marks) 
Question No. 1 is compulsory. 
Attempt any two questions out of the remaining three questions. 
1.  
(a)  Jupiter Electronics Ltd. is known for its ability to come out with path-
breaking products. Though the work environment at Jupiters is relaxed 
and casual, there is a very strong commitment to deadlines. The 
employees believe in a “work hard play hard" ethic. The organisation has 
moved away from formal and hierarchical set up to a more results-driven 
approach. Employees are committed to strategies and work towards 
achieving them. They guard innovations, maintain confidentiality and 
secrecy in their work. They are closely related to values, practices, and 
norms of organisations. What aspects of an organization are being 
discussed? Explain. 
(5 Marks) 
(b) 
Reshuffle Corp is a company that manufactures and sells office furniture. 
They offer a range of products, from desks and chairs to cabinets and 
shelves. Recently, the company has been facing increased competition 
from online retailers offering similar products at lower prices. 
 
Analyzing the characteristics of products in the furniture industry, 
discuss how Reshuffle Corp can differentiate its products to maintain a 
competitive edge in the market.  
     (5 Marks) 
(c)  A business consultancy firm focuses on providing specialized services 
in environmental management consultancy. It assists client companies 
in establishing robust environmental management accounting systems 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 12>>
12 
for the measurement, recording, and analysis of environmental costs. A 
significant portion of the firm’s operations involve conducting 
environmental audits to verify compliance with international assurance 
standards in environmental management—an exclusive service not 
offered by its competitors. While the firm also undertakes other 
management consultancy projects, these constitute only a minor share 
of its total annual revenue. Identify the strategy categories by Michael 
Porter which best describes the strategy of this firm. 
(5 Marks) 
2.  
(a)  Analyze the role of Key Success Factors (KSFs) in determining 
competitive success within an industry. 
(5 Marks) 
(b)  How the 'Strategic Business Unit’ (SBU), structure becomes imperative 
in an organization with increase in number, size and diversity of 
divisions? 
(5 Marks) 
3. 
(a)  Rohit Patel has a small chemist shop in the central part of Ahmedabad. 
What kind of competencies Rohit can build to gain competitive 
advantage over online medicine sellers? 
(5 Marks) 
(b)  Distinguish between Vision and Mission. 
(5 Marks) 
4.  
(a)  Vikram Patel owns a chain of ten bookstores across the Mumbai region. 
Three of these stores were launched in the past two years. He has 
always believed in strategic management and enjoyed robust sales of 
books, magazines, and educational materials until about five years ago. 
However, with the increasing preference for online shopping, the sales 
at his physical stores have declined by approximately sixty percent over 
the last five years. Analyze Vikram Patel's current position in light of the 
limitations of strategic management. 
(5 Marks) 
(b)  Explain the strategic implications of each of the following types of 
business in a corporate portfolio:  
(a)  Stars  
(b)  Question Marks  (c)  Cash Cows  
(d)  Dogs  
OR 
Strategic alliances are formed if they provide an advantage to all the 
parties in the alliance. Do you agree? Explain in brief the advantages of 
a strategic alliance. 
(5 Marks) 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
