<<PAGE 1>>
1 
Mock Test Paper - Series II: August, 2024 
Date of Paper: 23rd August, 2024 
Time of Paper: 2 P.M. to 5 P.M. 
 
INTERMEDIATE GROUP – II  
PAPER – 6A : FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT & STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
PAPER 6A: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Time Allowed – 3 Hours (Total time for 6A and 6B)  
Maximum Marks – 50 
1. 
The question paper comprises two parts, Part I and Part II. 
2. 
Part I comprises Case Scenario based Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs) 
3. 
Part II comprises questions which require descriptive type answers. 
4. 
Working note should form part of the answer. Wherever necessary, suitable 
assumptions may be made by the candidates and disclosed by way of note. 
However, in answers to Questions in Division A, working notes are not 
required. 
 
PART I – Case Scenario based MCQs (15 Marks) 
Write the most appropriate answer to each of the following multiple choice 
questions by choosing one of the four options given. All questions are 
compulsory. 
 
Mathangi Ltd. is a News broadcasting channel having its broadcasting Centre in 
Chennai. There are total 200 employees in the organisation including top 
management. As a part of employee benefit expenses, the company serves tea to 
its employees, which is outsourced from a third-party. The company offers tea three 
times a day to each of its employees. The third-party charges ` 10 for each cup of 
tea. The company works for 200 days in a year.  
Looking at the substantial amount of expenditure on tea, the finance department 
has proposed to the management an installation of a master tea vending machine 
from Nirmal Ltd which will cost ` 5,00,000 with a useful life of five years. Upon 
purchasing the machine, the company will have to incur annual maintenance which 
will require a payment of ` 25,000 every year. The machine would require electricity 
consumption of 500 units p.m. and current incremental cost of electricity for the 
company is ` 24 per unit. Apart from these running costs, the company will have to 
incur ` 8,00,000 for consumables like milk, tea powder, paper cup, sugar etc. The 
company is in the 25% tax bracket. Straight line method of depreciation is allowed 
for the purpose of taxation.  
Nirmal Ltd sells 100 master tea vending machines. Variable cost is ` 4,50,000 per 
machine and fixed operating cost is ` 25,00,000. Capital Structure of Mathangi Ltd 
and Nirmal Ltd consists of the following – 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 2>>
2 
Particulars 
Mathangi Ltd. 
Nirmal Ltd. 
Equity Share Capital (Face value ` 10 each) 
40,00,000 
40,00,000 
Reserves & Surplus 
25,00,000 
50,00,000 
12% Preference Share Capital 
12,00,000 
Nil 
15% Debentures 
20,00,000 
40,00,000 
Risk free rate of return = 5%, Market return = 10%, Beta of the Mathangi Ltd. = 1.9 
You are required to answer the following five questions based on the above details: 
1. 
If sales of Nirmal Ltd are up by 10%, impact on its EBIT is 
(a) 
30% 
(b) 
60% 
(c) 
5% 
(d) 
20% 
2. 
Combined leverage of Nirmal Ltd is 
(a) 
1.63 
(b) 
2.63 
(c) 
1.315 
(d) 
2 
3. 
Discount rate that can be applied for making investment decisions of Mathangi 
Ltd is 
(a) 
12% 
(b) 
13.52% 
(c) 
15% 
(d) 
20% 
4. 
Incremental cash flow after tax per annum attributable to Mathangi Ltd due to 
investment in the machine is 
(a) 
` 2,39,438 
(b) 
` 1,98,250 
(c) 
` 98,250 
(d) 
` 1,31,000 
5. 
Net present value of investment in the machine by Mathangi Ltd is 
(a) 
` 6,88,522 
(b) 
` 1,88,522 
(c) 
` 9,91,250 
(d) 
` 4,91,250 
(5 x 2 = 10 Marks) 
 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 3>>
3 
6. 
Total Assets & Current liabilities of the Vitrag Limited are 50 lakhs & 10 lakhs 
respectively. ROCE is 15%, measure of business operating risk is at 3.5 & 
P/V ratio is 70%. Calculate Sales.  
(a)  21 lakhs 
(b)  30 lakhs 
(c)  37.50 lakhs 
(d)  40 lakhs 
(2 Marks) 
7. 
A company has issued bonds with a face value of ` 100,000 at an annual 
coupon rate of 8%. The bonds are currently trading at 95% of their face value. 
What is the approximate cost of debt for the company before taxes. 
(a)  9.00% 
(b)  7.65% 
(c)  8.00% 
(d)  8.42% 
(2 Marks) 
8. 
A company is considering changing its capital structure by increasing its debt 
ratio from 40% to 55%. What is the likely impact on the company’s cost of 
equity, assuming all other factors remain constant? 
(a)  Cost of equity will be unaffected by debt ratio 
(b)  Cost of equity will remain unchanged 
(c)  Cost of equity will decrease 
(d)  Cost of equity will increase 
(1 Mark) 
 
PART II – Descriptive Questions (35 Marks) 
Question No. 1 is compulsory. 
Attempt any two questions out of the remaining three questions. 
1. 
(a) 
X Ltd is willing to raise funds for its New Project which requires an 
investment of ` 84 Lakhs. The Company has two options: 
Option I: 
To issue Equity Shares (` 10 each) only 
Option II: To avail Term Loan at an interest rate of 12%. But in this 
case, as insisted by the Financing Agencies, the 
Company will have to maintain a Debt–Equity proportion 
of 2:1. 
The Corporate Tax Rate is 30%. FIND out the point of indifference for 
the project.  
(5 Marks) 
(b)  Mr. Anand is thinking of buying a Share at ` 500 whose Face Value per 
share is ` 100. He is expecting a bonus at the ratio 1 : 5 at the end of 
the fourth year. Annual expected dividend is 20% and the same rate is 
expected to be maintained on the expanded capital base. He intends to 
sell the Shares at the end of seventh year at an expected price of ` 900 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 4>>
4 
each. Incidental Expenses for purchase and sale of Shares are 
estimated to be 5% of the Market Price. Assuming a Discount rate of 
12% per annum, COMPUTE the Net Present Value from the acquisition 
of the shares.  
(5 Marks) 
(c)  Paarath Limited had recently repurchased 20,000 equity shares at a 
premium of 10% to its prevailing market price. The book value per share 
(after repurchasing) is ` 193.20. 
Other Details of the company are as follows: 
Earnings of the company (before buyback) = ` 18,00,000 
Current MPS is ` 270 with a P/E Ratio of 18. 
CALCULATE the Book Value per share of the company before the re-
purchase. 
(5 Marks) 
2. 
(a)  Sukrut Limited has annual credit sales of ` 75,00,000/-. Actual credit 
terms are 30 days, but its management of receivables has been poor, 
and the average collection period is about 60 days.  Bad debt is 1 per 
cent of total sales.  
A factor has offered to take over the task of debt administration and 
credit checking, at an annual fee of 1.5 per cent of credit sales. 
Sukrut Limited estimates that it would save ` 45,000 per year in 
administration costs as a result. Due to the efficiency of the factor, the 
average collection period would come back to the original credit offered 
of 30 days and bad debts would come to 0.5% on recourse basis.  
The factor would pay net advance of 80 percent to the company at an 
annual interest rate of 12 per cent after withholding a reserve of 10%. 
Sukrut Limited is currently financing its receivables from an overdraft 
costing 10 per cent per year and will continue to finance the balance fund 
needed (which is not financed by factor) through the overdraft facility 
If occurrence of credit sales is throughout the year, COMPUTE whether 
the factor’s services should be accepted or rejected. Assume 360 days 
in a year. 
(7 Marks) 
(b)  Determining the amount to be invested in current assets as working 
capital is a crucial policy decision for any entity. What FACTORS should 
a company consider when deciding the level of investment in working 
capital? 
(3 Marks) 
3.  
(a) 
Calculate the WACC using the following data by using Market Value 
weights: 
Particulars 
` 
Equity Shares  (` 10 per equity share) 
15,00,000 
Reserves & Surplus     
   5,00,000 
Preference Shares    (` 100 per preference share) 
  7,50,000 
Debentures    (` 100 per debenture) 
  5,50,000 
The market prices of these securities are:  
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 5>>
5 
Debentures - ` 105 per debenture,   
Preference shares - `115 per preference share  
Equity shares - ` 27 per equity share 
Additional information:  
(1)  ` 100 FV per debenture redeemable at premium of 10%, 10% 
coupon rate, 4% floatation costs, 10-year maturity.  
(2)  ` 100 FV per preference share redeemable at par, 12% coupon 
rate, 2% floatation cost and 10-year maturity.  
(3)  Equity shares have ` 4.5 floatation cost and market price of 27 per 
share. 
The last dividend paid by the company was ` 2 which is expected to grow 
at an annual growth rate of 9%. The firm has the practice of paying all 
earnings as a dividend.  
The corporate tax rate is 25%. To calculate the overall cost of debt & 
preference shares, take the average of their respective costs using YTM 
& approximation method. 
 (6 Marks) 
(b)  EPL Ltd. has furnished the following information relating to the year 
ended 31st March 2023 and 31st March, 2024:  
 
31st March, 2023  31st March, 2024  
Share Capital  
50,00,000  
50,00,000  
Reserve and Surplus  
20,00,000  
25,00,000  
Long term loan  
30,00,000  
30,00,000  
• 
Net profit ratio: 8%  
• 
Gross profit ratio: 20%  
• 
Long-term loan has been used to finance 40% of the fixed assets.  
• 
Stock turnover with respect to cost of goods sold is 4.  
• 
Debtors represent 90 days sales.  
• 
The company holds cash equivalent to 1½ months cost of goods 
sold.  
• 
Ignore taxation and assume 360 days in a year.  
You are required to PREPARE Balance Sheet as on 31st March 2024 in 
following format:  
Liabilities  
(` ) Assets  
(`) 
Share Capital  
- Fixed Assets  
- 
Reserve and Surplus  
- Sundry Debtors  
- 
Long-term loan  
- Closing Stock  
- 
Sundry Creditors  
- Cash in hand  
- 
(4 Marks) 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 6>>
6 
4.  
(a) 
The agency problem is one of the key concepts in corporate governance 
and financial management. On the light of this statement, EXPLAIN 
agency problem, consequences of agency problem and how to 
overcome the issue. 
(4 Marks) 
(b) 
Operating leases and financial leases are traditionally the most important 
types of leases in financial management. However, in recent years, other 
types of leases have also gained significance due to their unique benefits 
and applications. IDENTIFY AND EXPLAIN at least four other types of 
leases that have become increasingly important in modern business 
practices.    
 
 (4 Marks) 
(c) 
EXPLAIN the Relationship between EBIT-EPS-MPS 
(2 Marks) 
OR 
(c)  EXPLAIN Financial Leverage as a ‘Double edged Sword’ 
 (2 Marks) 
 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 7>>
7 
PAPER 6B: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
1. 
The question paper comprises two parts, Part I and Part II. 
2. 
Part I comprises case scenario based multiple choice questions (MCQs) 
3. 
Part II comprises questions which require descriptive type answers. 
PART I – Case scenario based MCQs (15 Marks) 
Question 1. (Compulsory) 
1. 
(A)  Sneha Rao, founder and CEO of DEF Technologies, is renowned for her 
technological insight and visionary leadership style. She cultivates a 
culture of collaboration, continuous learning, and innovative problem-
solving, encouraging her employees to think outside the box and 
embrace 
new 
challenges. 
Her 
exceptional 
ability 
to 
foresee 
technological trends and navigate complex market dynamics has 
propelled DEF Technologies to impressive growth over the past decade. 
 
Sneha started DEF Technologies in 2010 as a small software 
development firm. With a vision to transform DEF Technologies into a 
leading tech company, she initially focused on developing custom 
software solutions for local businesses. However, intense competition 
and limited market demand led to financial difficulties. Undeterred, 
Sneha pivoted the business towards developing cloud-based solutions, 
leveraging the growing trend of digital transformation. This strategic shift, 
along with aggressive marketing, helped DEF Technologies capture a 
significant market share and become a leader in cloud services, setting 
new industry standards. 
 
In 2015, Sneha's brother, Raj, joined the company, and together they 
crafted an ambitious expansion strategy. DEF Technologies entered the 
global market, partnering with international tech firms to launch a new 
line of AI-driven cybersecurity solutions. This venture was highly 
successful, establishing DEF Technologies as a global brand and a key 
player in the cybersecurity industry. 
 
Raj then led the company’s diversification into the healthcare sector with 
a new brand, MedTech Solutions. Recognizing the potential for 
technology to revolutionize healthcare, Sneha and Raj focused on 
developing affordable telemedicine platforms and AI-driven diagnostic 
tools. Their approach disrupted the market, providing high-quality 
healthcare solutions at lower costs and gaining widespread trust from 
healthcare providers and patients alike. MedTech Solutions experienced 
rapid growth, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic, as demand for 
remote healthcare services surged. 
 
At the beginning of 2023, DEF Technologies launched another new 
business, GreenTech Innovations, to address environmental challenges 
through technology. DEF Technologies continues to explore new 
opportunities and ventures to stay at the forefront of the tech industry. 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 8>>
8 
 
Based on the above Case Scenario, answer the Multiple-Choice 
Questions. 
(i)  
Sneha Rao's vision to transform DEF Technologies into a leading 
tech company illustrates which type of strategic intent?  
(a)  Goal 
(b)  Mission 
(c)  Vision 
(d)  Objective 
(2 Marks) 
(ii)  Sneha’s leadership style, which promotes collaboration, continuous 
learning, and innovative problem-solving, can best be described as:  
(a)  Transactional leadership 
(b)  Transformational leadership 
(c)  Autocratic leadership 
(d)  Laissez-faire leadership 
(2 Marks) 
(iii) When DEF Technologies expanded into the global market with AI-
driven cybersecurity solutions, which of Porter's Five Forces was 
most likely mitigated by forming partnerships with international tech 
firms?  
(a)  Threat of Substitute Products or Services  
(b)  Bargaining Power of Suppliers  
(c)  Threat of New Entrants  
(d)  Intense Rivalry Among Existing Competitors 
(2 Marks) 
(iv)  By 
entering 
the 
global 
market 
and 
launching 
AI-driven 
cybersecurity 
solutions, 
DEF Technologies pursued 
which 
expansion strategy from Ansoff’s Product-Market Growth Matrix?  
(a)  Diversification 
(b)  Market Penetration 
(c)  Product Development 
 
(d)  Market Development 
(2 Marks) 
(v)  MedTech Solutions’ focus on developing affordable telemedicine 
platforms and AI-driven diagnostic tools reflects which of the 
following competitive strategies?  
(a)  Differentiation strategy 
(b)  Cost leadership strategy 
(c)  Best-cost provider strategy 
(d)  Focus Strategy 
(2 Marks) 
 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 9>>
9 
(B)  Compulsory Application Based Independent MCQs 
(i)  
A traditional desi ghee company modernized its production and 
introduced pro-biotic desi ghee, facing initial market doubts. 
Aggressive marketing campaigns highlighted its benefits, gaining 
acceptance. During which stage of the product life cycle did the 
desi ghee company face doubts but gained acceptance through 
aggressive marketing campaigns? 
(a)  Introduction stage 
(b)  Growth stage 
(c)  Maturity stage 
(d)  Decline stage 
(2 Marks) 
(ii)  ValueMart is a discount retail chain that targets budget-conscious 
consumers by offering a wide range of products at the lowest 
possible prices. The company achieves this by sourcing goods in 
bulk, negotiating lower prices with suppliers, and maintaining lean 
operations. ValueMart's goal is to dominate the market by attracting 
price-sensitive customers from competitors. Which of Michael 
Porter’s Generic Strategies is ValueMart primarily employing? 
(a)  Differentiation 
(b)  Focused Cost Leadership 
(c)  Cost Leadership 
(d)  Focused Differentiation 
(2 Marks) 
(iii)  A women’s clothing brand recognized new opportunities and 
researched emerging trends and consumer preferences. They 
introduced a new clothing line, received positive feedback from 
initial trials, and grew through strategic partnerships and targeted 
advertising. What strategic choice best describes this approach? 
(a)  Product Development 
(b)  Market Development 
(c)  Market Penetration 
(d)  Diversification 
(1 Mark) 
PART II – Descriptive Questions (35 Marks) 
Question No. 1 is compulsory. 
Attempt any two questions out of the remaining three questions. 
1. 
(a)  TechNova, a leading software development firm known for its cutting-
edge operating systems, is developing a groundbreaking new platform. 
ElectroWave, an emerging player in the electronics and hardware 
industry, specializes in manufacturing advanced devices. TechNova and 
ElectroWave have decided to join forces to design innovative laptops 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
<<PAGE 10>>
10 
and smartphones, aiming to tap into new markets and broaden their 
business horizons. What kind of external growth strategy is being 
considered by TechNova and ElectroWave? 
(5 Marks) 
(b) 
Vikram Patel owns a chain of ten bookstores across the Mumbai region. 
Three of these stores were launched in the past two years. He has 
always believed in strategic management and enjoyed robust sales of 
books, magazines, and educational materials until about five years ago. 
However, with the increasing preference for online shopping, the sales 
at his physical stores have declined by approximately sixty percent over 
the last five years. Analyze Vikram Patel's current position in light of the 
limitations of strategic management. 
 (5 Marks) 
(c)  Orion Tech Solutions Pvt. Ltd. is renowned for its ability to launch 
groundbreaking software products. Despite the relaxed and casual work 
environment at Orion, there is a strong commitment to meeting 
deadlines. Employees at Orion believe in the "work hard, play hard" 
ethic. The company has shifted from a formal, hierarchical structure to a 
more results-oriented approach. Employees are deeply committed to the 
company’s strategies and work diligently to achieve them. They 
safeguard innovations and maintain strict confidentiality and secrecy in 
their operations. Their work culture is closely aligned with the 
organization's values, practices, and norms. What aspects of an 
organization are being discussed? Explain. 
(5 Marks) 
2.  
(a)  Analyze the role of Key Success Factors (KSFs) in determining 
competitive success within an industry. 
(5 Marks) 
(b)  What are distribution channels, and why is analyzing them crucial for 
business expansion? Describe the three main types of channels 
explaining their roles in ensuring products reach customers efficiently 
and with the necessary support. 
     (5 Marks) 
3. 
(a) 
What is a strategic vision, and what are the essential components that 
make it an effective tool for guiding an organization's future?  (5 Marks) 
(b)  Which strategy is implemented by redefining the business, by enlarging 
its scope of business and substantially increasing investment in the 
business?  Explain the major reasons for adopting this strategy.(5 Marks) 
4.  
(a)  Describe the principal aspects of strategy-execution process, which are 
included in most situations. 
(5 Marks) 
(b)  How does the PESTLE framework assist in analyzing the macro-
environment? 
OR 
 
A manufacturing company is in direct competition with fifteen companies 
at the national level. The head of marketing department of this company 
wishes to study the market position of rival companies by grouping them 
into like positions. Name the tool that may be used by him/her.  Explain 
the procedure that may be used to implement the techniques. (5 Marks) 
Downloaded from castudyweb.com
