[p1]
CHAPTER
2
TYPES OF FINANCING
After studying this chapter, you would be able to -
♦
Describe the different sources of finance available to a business,
both internal and external.
♦
Discuss the various long term, medium term and short-term
sources of finance.
♦
Discuss in detail some of the important sources of finance,
this would include Venture Capital financing, Lease financing
and financing of export trade by banks.
♦
Discuss the concept of Securitization.
♦
Discuss the financing in the International market by
understanding various financial instruments prevalent in the
international market.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
[p2]

## 1. FINANCIAL
NEEDS
AND
SOURCES
OF
FINANCE OF A BUSINESS
Financial Needs of a Business
Business enterprises need funds to meet their different types of requirements. All
the financial needs of a business may be grouped into the following three
categories:
(i)
Long-term financial needs: Such needs generally refer to those
requirements of funds which are for a period exceeding 5-10 years. All
investments in plant, machinery, land, buildings, etc., are considered as longterm financial needs. Funds required to finance permanent or hard-core
working capital should also be procured from long term sources.
(ii)
Medium-term financial needs: Such requirements refer to those funds
which are required for a period exceeding one year but not exceeding
5 years. This might be needed for stores and spares, critical spares, tools, dies,
moulds.
Sources of Finance
Equity Share Capital
Preference Share Capital
Retained Earnings
Debentures/ Bonds
Loans from Financial
Institution
Others
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
[p3]
TYPES OF FINANCING

## (iii) Short-term financial needs: Such type of financial needs arise to finance
current assets such as stock, debtors, cash etc. Investment in these assets are
known as meeting of working capital requirements of the concern. The main
characteristic of short-term financial needs is that they arise for a short period
of time not exceeding the accounting period. i.e., one year.
Basic Principle for Funding Various Needs
The basic principle for meeting the short-term financial needs of a concern is that
such needs should be met from short term sources, and medium-term financial
needs from medium term sources and long term financial needs from long term
sources. Accordingly, the method of raising funds is to be decided with reference
to the period for which funds are required.
General rule for financing of different assets would take place. These rules can be
changed depending on the nature of borrower i.e. depending on the borrower's
level of operation Besides, the stage of development of the business and nature of
business would also decide the type of borrowing. Generally, it can be as follows:
Stage
Nature of Business
Sources of Fund
Early stage
High Uncertainty
Equity; mainly Angel fund
High
to
moderate
Uncertainty
Equity; Venture capital; Debt
Growth Stage
Moderate
to
Low
Uncertainty
Debt; Venture Capital; Private
Equity
Stable stage
Low Uncertainty
Debt

## 2. CLASSIFICATION OF FINANCIAL SOURCES
There are mainly two ways of classifying various financial sources (i) Based on basic
Sources (ii) Based on Maturity of repayment period (iii) Based on Ownership and
Control.
[p4]
Sources of Finance based on Basic Sources
Based on basic sources of finance, types of financing can be classified as below:

## 2.2 Sources of Finance based on Maturity of Payment
Based on maturity of payment, types of financing can be classified as below:
Sources of Finance
External
Sources
Share Capital
Equity Shares
Preference Shares
Debt or
Borrowed
Capital
Debentures
Loan from Financial
Institutions
Others
Internal
Sources
Mainly
retained
earnings
Sources of Finance
Long-term

## 1. Share capital or
Equity shares

## 2. Preference shares

## 3. Retained earnings

## 4. Debentures/Bonds
of different types

## 5. Loans from financial
institutions

## 6. Loans from State
Financial
Corporations

## 7. Loans from
commercial banks

## 8. Venture capital
funding

## 9. Asset securitisation

## 10. International
financing like Euroissues, Foreign
currency loans
Medium-term

## 1. Preference shares

## 2. Debentures/Bonds

## 3. Public deposits/fixed
deposits for duration
of three years

## 4. Medium term loans
from Commercial
banks, Financial
Institutions, State
Financial
Corporations

## 5. Lease
financing/HirePurchase financing

## 6. External commercial
borrowings

## 7. Euro-issues

## 8. Foreign Currency
bonds
Short-term

## 1. Trade credit

## 2. Accrued expenses
and  deferred
income

## 3. Short term loans like
Working Capital
Loans from
Commercial banks

## 4. Avances received
from customers

## 6. Various short-term
provisions
[p5]
TYPES OF FINANCING
2.3 Sources of Finance based on Ownership and Control.
Based on Ownership and Control, types of financing can be classified as below:

## 3. LONG-TERM SOURCES OF FINANCE
There are different sources of funds available to meet long term financial needs of
the business. These sources may be broadly classified into:
♦
Share capital (both equity and preference) &
♦
Debt (including debentures, long term borrowings or other debt
instruments).
The different sources of long-term finance have been discussed as follows:
Owners Capital or Equity Capital
A public limited company may raise funds from promoters or from the investing
public by way of owner's capital or equity capital by issuing ordinary equity shares.
Some of the characteristics of Owners/Equity Share Capital are:
♦
It is a source of permanent capital. The holders of such share capital in the
company are called equity shareholders or ordinary shareholders.
Sources of
Finance
Owner's
fund
Equity Share
Capital
Retained earnings
Borrowed
fund
Debentures
Loan from banks
Loan from Financal
Institutions
Others
[p6]
♦
Equity shareholders are practically owners of the company as they undertake
the highest risk.
♦
Equity shareholders are entitled to dividends after the income claims of other
stakeholders are satisfied. The dividend payable to them is an appropriation
of profits and not a charge against profits.
♦
In the event of winding up, ordinary shareholders can exercise their claim on
assets after the claims of the other suppliers of capital have been met.
♦
The cost of ordinary shares is usually the highest. This is due to the fact that
such shareholders expect a higher rate of return (as their risk is the highest)
on their investment as compared to other suppliers of long-term funds.
♦
Ordinary share capital also provides a security to other suppliers of funds.
Any institution giving loan to a company would make sure the debt-equity
ratio is comfortable to cover the debt. There can be various types of equity
shares like New issue, Rights issue, Bonus Shares, Sweat Equity.
Advantages of raising funds by issue of equity shares are:
(i)
It is a permanent source of finance. Since such shares are not redeemable,
the company has no liability for cash outflows associated with its redemption.
In other words, once the company has issued equity shares, they are tradable
i.e. they can be purchased and sold. So, a company is in no way responsible
for any cash outflows of investors by which they become the shareholders of
the company by purchasing the shares of existing shareholders.
(ii)
Equity capital increases the company's financial base and thus helps to further
the borrowing powers of the company. In other words, by issuing equity
shares, a company manage to raise some money for its capital expenditures
and this helps it to raise more funds with the help of debt. This is because;
debt will enable the company to increase its earnings per share and
consequently, its share prices.
(iii)
A company is not obliged legally to pay dividends. Hence in times of
uncertainties or when the company is not performing well, dividend payments
can be reduced or even suspended.
[p7]
TYPES OF FINANCING
(iv)
A company can make further increase its share capital by initiating a right
issue.
Disadvantages of raising funds by issue of equity shares are:
Apart from the above mentioned advantages, raising of funds through equity share
capital has some disadvantages in comparison to other sources of finance. These
are as follows:
(i)
Investors find ordinary shares riskier because of uncertain dividend payments
and capital gains.
(ii)
The issue of new equity shares reduces the earning per share of the existing
shareholders until and unless the profits are proportionately increased.
(iii)
The issue of new equity shares can also reduce the ownership and control of
the existing shareholders.

## 3.2 Preference Share Capital
These are special kind of shares; the holders of such shares enjoy priority, both as
regard to the payment of a fixed amount of dividend and also towards repayment
of capital on winding up of the company. Some of the characteristics of Preference
Share Capital are as follows:
♦
Long-term funds from preference shares can be raised through a public issue
of shares.
♦
Such shares are normally cumulative, i.e., the dividend payable in a year of
loss gets carried over to the next year till there are adequate profits to pay
the cumulative dividends.
♦
The rate of dividend on preference shares is normally higher than the rate of
interest on debentures, loans etc.
♦
Most of preference shares these days carry a stipulation of period and the
funds have to be repaid at the end of a stipulated period.
♦
Preference share capital is a hybrid form of financing which imbibes within
itself some characteristics of equity capital and some attributes of debt
capital. It is similar to equity because preference dividend, like equity
[p8]
dividend is not a tax-deductible payment. It resembles debt capital because
the rate of preference dividend is fixed.
♦
Cumulative Convertible Preference Shares (CCPs) may also be offered, under
which the shares would carry a cumulative dividend of specified limit for a
period of say three years after which the shares are converted into equity
shares. These shares are attractive for projects with a long gestation period.
♦
Preference share capital may be redeemed at a pre decided future date or at
an earlier stage inter alia out of the profits of the company. This enables the
promoters to withdraw their capital from the company which is now selfsufficient, and the withdrawn capital may be reinvested in other profitable
ventures.
Various types of Preference shares can be as below:
Sl. No. Type
of
Preference
Shares
Salient Features

## 1 Cumulative
Arrear Dividend will accumulate.

## 2 Non-cumulative
No right to arrear dividend.

## 3 Redeemable
Redemption should be done.

## 4 Participating
Can participate in the surplus which remains after
payment to equity shareholders.

## 5 Non-Participating Cannot participate in the surplus after payment of
fixed rate of Dividend.

## 6 Convertible
Option of converting into equity Shares.
Advantages of raising funds by issue of preference shares are:
(i)
No dilution in EPS on enlarged capital base – On the other hand if equity
shares are issued it reduces EPS, thus affecting the market perception about
the company.
[p9]
TYPES OF FINANCING
(ii)
There is also the advantage of leverage as it bears a fixed charge (because
companies are required to pay a fixed rate of dividend in case of a issue of
preference shares). Non-payment of preference dividends does not force a
company into liquidity.
(iii)
There is no risk of takeover as the preference shareholders do not have voting
rights except where dividend payment are in arrears.
(iv)
The preference dividends are fixed and pre-decided. Hence preference
shareholders cannot participate in surplus profits as the ordinary
shareholders can except in case of participating preference shareholders.
(v)
Preference capital can be redeemed after a specified period.
Disadvantages of raising funds by issue of preference shares are:
(i)
One of the major disadvantages of preference shares is that preference
dividend is not tax deductible and so does not provide a tax shield to the
company. Hence preference shares are costlier to the company than debt e.g.
debenture.
(ii)
Preference dividends are cumulative in nature.  This means that if in a
particular year preference dividends are not paid they shall  be accumulated
and paid later. Also, if these dividends are not paid, no dividend can be paid
to ordinary shareholders. The non-payment of dividend to ordinary
shareholders could seriously impair the reputation of the concerned
company.
Difference between Equity Shares and Preference Shares are as follows:
Sl.
No.
Basis
of
Distinction
Equity Share
Preference Share

## 1 Dividend
payment
Equity Dividend is paid
after
preference
dividend.
Payment of preference
dividend is preferred over
equity dividend.

## 2 Rate of dividend
Fluctuating
Fixed

## 3 Convertibility
Not convertible
Convertible

## 4 Voting rights
Equity
shareholders
enjoy full voting rights.
They have very limited voting
rights.
[p10]

## 3.3 Retained Earnings
Long-term funds may also be provided by accumulating the profits of the
company and by ploughing them back into business. Such funds belong to the
ordinary shareholders and increase the net worth of the company. A public limited
company must plough back a reasonable amount of profit every year keeping in
view the legal requirements in this regard and also for its own expansion plans.
Such funds also entail almost no risk. Further, control of present owners is also not
diluted by retaining profits.
The decision to plough back depends on the rate of return generated by company
vs expected cost of equity. This is further discussed in dividend decision chapter.

## 3.4 Debentures
Loans can be raised from public by issuing debentures or bonds by public limited
companies. Some of the characteristics of debentures are:
♦
Debentures are normally issued in different denominations ranging from `
100 to ` 1,000 and carry different rates of interest.
♦
Normally, debentures are issued on the basis of a debenture trust deed which
lists the terms and conditions on which the debentures are floated.
♦
Debentures are basically instruments for raising long-term debt capital.
♦
The period of maturity normally varies from 3 to 10 years and may also
increase for projects having high gestation period.
♦
Debentures are either secured or unsecured.
♦
They may or may not be listed on the stock exchange.
♦
The cost of capital raised through debentures is quite low since the interest
payable on debentures can be charged as an expense before tax.
♦
From the investors' point of view, debentures offer a more attractive prospect
than the preference shares since interest on debentures is payable whether
or not the company makes profits.
[p11]
TYPES OF FINANCING
Debentures can be divided into the following three categories based on their
convertibility:
(i)
Non-convertible debentures – These types of debentures do not have any
feature of conversion and are repayable on maturity.
(ii)
Fully convertible debentures – Such debentures are converted into equity
shares as per the terms of issue in relation to price and the time of conversion.
Interest rates on such debentures are generally less than the non-convertible
debentures because they carry an attractive feature of getting themselves
converted into shares at a later time.

## (iii) Partly convertible debentures – These debentures carry features of both
convertible and non-convertible debentures. The investor has the advantage
of having both the features in one debenture.
Other types of Debentures with their features are as follows:
Sl.
No.
Type of Debenture
Salient Feature

## 1 Bearer
Transferable like negotiable instruments

## 2 Registered
Interest payable to registered person

## 3 Mortgage
Secured by a charge on Asset(s)

## 4 Naked or simple
Unsecured

## 5 Redeemable
Repaid after a certain period

## 6 Non-Redeemable
Not repayable
Advantages of raising finance by issue of debentures are:
(i)
The cost of debentures is much lower than the cost of preference or equity
capital as the interest is tax-deductible. Also, investors consider debenture
investment safer than equity or preferred investment and, hence, may require
a lower return on debenture investment.
(ii)
Debenture financing does not result in dilution of control.
(iii)
In a period of rising prices, debenture issue is advantageous. The fixed
monetary outgo decreases in real terms as the price level increases. In other
words, the company has to pay a fixed rate of interest.
[p12]
Disadvantages of debenture financing are:
(i)
Debenture interest and the repayment of its principal amount is an obligatory
payment.
(ii)
The protective covenants associated with a debenture issue may be
restrictive.
(iii)
Debenture financing enhances the financial risk associated with the firm
because of the reasons given in point (i).
(iv)
Since debentures need to be paid at the time of maturity, a large amount of
cash outflow is needed at that time.
Public issue of debentures and private placement to mutual funds now require that
a debenture issue must be rated by a credit rating agency like CRISIL (Credit Rating
and Information Services of India Ltd.). The credit rating is given after evaluating
factors like track record of the company, profitability, debt servicing capacity, credit
worthiness and the perceived risk of lending.
Difference between Preference Shares and Debentures
Basis of
difference
Preference shares
Debentures
Ownership
Preference Share Capital is a
special kind of share
Debenture is a type of loan
which can be raised from the
public
Payment
of
Dividend/
Interest
The
preference
shareholders
enjoy priority both as regard to
the payment of a fixed amount
of dividend and also towards
repayment of capital in case of
winding up of a company
It carries fixed percentage of
interest.
Nature
Preference shares are a hybrid
form of financing with some
characteristic of equity shares
and some attributes of Debt
Capital.
Debentures are instrument for
raising long term capital with a
fixed period of maturity.
[p13]
TYPES OF FINANCING

## 3.5 Bond
Bond is fixed income security created to raise fund. Bonds can be raised through
Public Issue and through Private Placement.
Types of Bonds
Based on call, Bonds can be categorized as:
(i)
Callable bonds,  (ii)
Puttable bonds
(i)
Callable bonds: A callable bond has a call option which gives the issuer the
right to redeem the bond before maturity at a predetermined price known as
the call price (Generally at a premium).
(ii)  Puttable bonds: Puttable bonds give the investor a put option (i.e. the right
to sell the bond) back to the company before maturity.
Various Bonds with their salient features are as follows:
(i)
Foreign Bonds
Sl.
No.
Name of Bond
Salient Features

## 1. Foreign
Currency
Convertible
Bond
(FCCB)
•
This bond comes at a very low rate of
interest.
•
The advantage to the issuer is that the
issuer can get foreign currency at a very
low cost.
•
The risk is that in case the bond has to be
redeemed on the date of maturity, the
issuer has to make the payment and at
that time the issuer may not have the
money.

## 2. Plain Vanilla Bond
•
The issuer would pay the principal amount
along with the interest rate.
•
This type of bond would not have any
options.
•
This bond can be issued in the form of
discounted bond or can be issued in the
form of coupon bearing bond.
[p14]

## 3. Convertible
Floating
Rate
Notes (FRN)
•
A convertible FRN is issued by giving its
holder an option to convert it into a longer
term debt security with a specified coupon
•
It protects an investor against falling
interest rate
•
The long- term debt security can be sold
in the market and the investor can earn
profit
•
Capital gain is not applicable to FRN

## 4. Drop Lock Bond
•
It is a Floating Rate Note with a normal
floating rate
•
The
floating
rate
bond
would
be
automatically converted into fixed rate
bond if interest rate falls below a
predetermined level
•
The new fixed rate stays till the drop lock
bond reaches its maturity
•
The difference between the convertible
floating rate note and drop lock bond is
that the former is a long option structure
and the later one is a short option
structure

## 5. Variable
Rate
Demand
Obligations
•
A normal floating rate note with a nominal
maturity
•
The holder of the floating rate note can
sell the obligation back to the trustee at
par plus accrued interest
•
It gives the investor an option to exit, so it
is more liquid than the normal FRN

## 6. Yield Curve Note
(YCN)
•
It is a structured debt security
•
Yield increases when prevailing interest
rate declines
•
Yield decreases when prevailing interest
rate increases
•
This is used to hedge the interest rate
[p15]
TYPES OF FINANCING
•
This works like inverse floater

## 7. Euro Bond
•
Euro bonds are issued or traded in a
country using a currency other than the
one in which the bond is denominated.
This means that the bond uses a certain
currency,
but
operates
outside
the
jurisdiction of the Central Bank that issues
that currency.
•
Eurobonds are issued by multinational
corporations,
for
example,
a
British
company may issue a Eurobond in
Germany, denominating it in U.S. dollars
•
It is important to note that the term has
nothing to do with the euro, and the prefix
"euro-" is used more generally to refer to
deposit outside the jurisdiction of the
domestic central bank

## 8. Emerging Market
Bond
•
A
debt
instrument
issued
by
the
developing countries.
•
It provides higher yields in comparison to
U.S. corporate and Treasury bonds.
•
Credit default swap (CDS) is used to
protect the bondholders against the
default.
•
It tend to carry higher risks than domestic
debt instruments.
(ii)
Indian Bonds
Sl.
No.
Name of Bond
Salient Feature

## 1. Masala Bond
Masala (means spice) bond is an Indian name used
for
Rupee
denominated
bond
that
Indian
corporate borrowers can sell to investors in
overseas markets.
•
These bonds are issued outside India but
denominated in Indian Rupees.
[p16]
•
NTPC raised ` 2,000 crore via masala bonds
for its capital expenditure in the year 2016.

## 2. Municipal
Bonds
Municipal bonds are used to finance urban
infrastructure are increasingly evident in India.
•
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation issued a
first historical Municipal Bond in Asia to raise
`100 crore from the capital market for part
financing a water supply project.

## 3. Government or
Treasury Bonds
Government or Treasury bonds are bonds issued
by Government of India, Reserve Bank of India, any
state Government or any other Government
department.
Some other bonds are included in other source of Financing (para 8)

## 3.6 Loans from Financial Institutions
(i)
Financial Institution: National
Sl.
No.
Name of the Financial
Institution
Year
of
Establishment
Remarks

## 1 Industrial
Finance
Corporation of India (IFCI)
1918
Converted
into
a
public company

## 2 State
Financial
Corporations (SFCs)
1951
-

## 3 Industrial
Development
Bank of India (IDBI)
1954
Converted into Bank

## 4 National
Industrial
Development Corporation
(NIDC)
1954
-

## 5 Industrial
Credit
and
Investment
Corporation
of India (ICICI)
1955
Converted into Bank
and Privatised

## 6 Life
Insurance
Corporation of India (LIC)
1956
-
[p17]
TYPES OF FINANCING

## 7. Unit Trust of India (UTI)
1964
-

## 8 Industrial Reconstruction
Bank of India (IRBI)
1971
(ii)
Financial Institution: International Institutions
Sl.
No.
Name of the Financial Institution
Year
of
Establishment

## 1 The
World
Bank/
International
Bank
for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
1944

## 2 The International Finance Corporation (IFC)
1956

## 3 Asian Development Bank (ADB)
1966

## 3.7 Loans from Commercial Banks
The primary role of the commercial banks is to cater to the short-term requirements
of industry. Of late, however, banks have started taking an interest in long term
financing of industries in several ways.
(a)
The banks provide long term loans for the purpose of expansion or setting
up of new units. Their repayment is usually scheduled over a long period of
time. The liquidity of such loans is said to depend on the anticipated income
of the borrowers.
(b)
As part of the long-term funding for a company, the banks also fund the long
term working capital requirement (it is also called WCTL i.e. working capital
term loan). It is funding of that portion of working capital which is always
required (the minimum level) and is not impacted by seasonal requirement
of the company.
Bridge Finance: Bridge finance refers to loans taken by a company normally from
commercial banks for a short period because of pending disbursement of loans
sanctioned by financial institutions. Though it is of short-term nature but since
it is an important step in the facilitation of long-term loan, therefore it is being
discussed along with the long term sources of funds. Normally, it takes time for
financial institutions to disburse loans to companies. However, once the loans are
approved by the term lending institutions, companies, in order not to lose further
time in starting their projects, arrange short term loans from commercial banks.
[p18]
The bridge loans are repaid/ adjusted out of the term loans as and when disbursed
by the concerned institutions. Bridge loans are normally secured by hypothecating
movable assets, personal guarantees and demand promissory notes. Generally, the
rate of interest on bridge finance is higher as compared with that on term loans.
Having discussed funding from share capital (equity/preference), raising of debt
from financial institutions and banks, we will now discuss some other important
sources of long-term finance.

## 4. VENTURE CAPITAL FINANCING
Meaning of Venture Capital Financing
The venture capital financing refers to financing of new high risky venture
promoted by qualified entrepreneurs who lack experience and funds to give
shape to their ideas. In broad sense, under venture capital financing, venture
capitalist make investment to purchase equity or debt securities from
inexperienced entrepreneurs who undertake highly risky ventures with potential to
succeed in future.

## 4.2 Characteristics of Venture Capital Financing
Some of the characteristics of Venture Capital financing are:
♦
It is basically an equity finance in new companies.
♦
It can be viewed as a long-term investment in growth-oriented small/medium
firms.
♦
Apart from providing funds, the investor also provides support in form of
sales strategy, business networking and management expertise, enabling the
growth of the entrepreneur.
[p19]
TYPES OF FINANCING

## 4.3 Methods of Venture Capital Financing
Some common methods of venture capital financing are as follows:
(i)
Equity financing: The venture capital undertakings generally require funds
for a longer period but may not be able to provide returns to the investors
during the initial stages. Therefore, the venture capital finance is generally
provided by way of equity share capital. The equity contribution of venture
capital firm does not exceed 49% of the total equity capital of venture capital
undertakings so that the effective control and ownership remains with the
entrepreneur.

## (ii)  Conditional loan: A conditional loan is repayable in the form of a royalty
after the venture is able to generate sales. No interest is paid on such loans.
In India venture capital financiers charge royalty ranging between 2 and 15
per cent; actual rate depends on other factors of the venture such as gestation
period, cash flow patterns, risk and other factors of the enterprise. Some
Venture capital financiers give a choice to the enterprise of paying a high rate
of interest (which could be well above 20 per cent) instead of royalty on sales
once it becomes commercially sound.

## (iii)  Income note:  It is a hybrid security which combines the features of both
conventional loan and conditional loan. The entrepreneur has to pay both
interest and royalty on sales but at substantially low rates. IDBI's VCF provides
funding equal to 80 – 87.50% of the projects cost for commercial application
of indigenous technology.

## (iv)  Participating debenture: Such security carries charges in three phases — in
the start-up phase no interest is charged, next stage a low rate of interest is
charged up to a particular level of operation, after that, a high rate of interest
is required to be paid.

## 5. DEBT SECURITISATION
Meaning of Debt Securitisation
Securitisation is a process in which illiquid assets are pooled into marketable
securities that can be sold to investors. The process leads to the creation of financial
instruments that represent ownership interest in, or are secured by a segregated
income producing asset or pool of assets. These assets are generally secured by
[p20]
personal or real property such as automobiles, real estate, or equipment loans but
in some cases are unsecured.
Example of Debt Securitisation
A finance company has given a large number of car loans. It needs more money so
that it is in a position to give more loans. One way to achieve this is to sell all the
existing loans. But, in the absence of a liquid secondary market for individual car
loans, this is not feasible.
However, a practical option is debt securitisation, in which the finance company
sells its existing car loans already given to borrowers to the Special Purpose Vehicle
(SPV). The SPV, in return pays to the company, which in turn continue to lend with
this money. On the other hand, the SPV pools these loans and convert these into
marketable securities. It means that now these converted securities can be issued
to investors.
So, this process of debt securitization helps the finance company to raise funds and
get the loans off its Balance Sheet. These funds also help the company disburse
further loans. Similarly, the process is beneficial to the investors also as it creates a
liquid investment in a diversified pool of car loans, which may be an attractive
option to other fixed income instruments. The whole process is carried out in such
a way that the original debtors i.e. the car loan borrowers may not be aware of the
transaction. They might have continued making payments the way they are already
doing. However, these payments shall now be made to the new investors who have
emerged out of this securitization process.

## 6. LEASE FINANCING
Leasing is a general contract between the owner and user of the asset over a
specified period of time. The asset is purchased initially by the lessor (leasing
company) and thereafter leased to the user (lessee company) which pays a specified
rent at periodical intervals. Thus, leasing is an alternative to the purchase of an
asset out of own or borrowed funds. Moreover, lease finance can be arranged much
faster as compared to term loans from financial institutions.
[p21]
TYPES OF FINANCING
Types of Lease Contracts
Broadly lease contracts can be divided into following two categories:

## (a) Operating Lease

## (b) Financial Lease
(a)
Operating Lease: An operating lease is a form of lease in which the right to
use the asset is given by the lessor to the lessee. However, the ownership
right of the asset remains with the lessor. The lessee gives a fixed amount of
periodic lease rentals to the lessor for using the asset. Further, the lessor also
bears the insurance, maintenance and repair costs etc. of the asset.
In operating lease, the lease period is short. So, the lessor may not be able to
recover the cost of the asset during the initial lease period and tend to lease
the asset to more than one lessee.  Normally, these are callable lease and are
cancelable with proper notice.
The term of this type of lease is shorter than the asset's economic life.  The
lessee is obliged to make payment until the lease expiration, which
approaches useful life of the asset.
An operating lease is particularly attractive to companies that continually
update or replace equipment and want to use equipment without ownership,
but also want to return equipment at lease end and avoid technological
obsolescence.
Note: The above diagram may be summarized in a short paragraph.
LESSEE
EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER
LESSOR
(the leasing company invests 10%)
BANK
(the 90% funder)
Paid by leasing company (100%)
Lease documents
Principal and agency agreement
Rents-amortise
banks debts
[p22]
(b)
Financial Lease: In contrast to an operating lease, a financial lease is long
term in nature and non-cancelable i.e. the lessee cannot terminate the lease
agreement subsequently So, the period of lease is generally the full economic
life of the leased asset. In other words, a financial lease can be regarded as
any leasing arrangement that is to finance the use of equipment for the major
parts of its useful life. The lessee has the right to use the equipment while the
lessor retains legal title. Further, in such lease, the lessee has to bear the
insurance, maintenance and other related costs. It is also called capital lease,
which is nothing but a loan in disguise.
Thus, it can be said that a financial lease is a contract involving payments over
an obligatory period of specified sums sufficient in total to amortise the
capital outlay of the lessor and give some profit.
Comparison between Financial Lease and Operating Lease
Financial Lease
Operating Lease

## 1. The risk and reward incident
to ownership are passed on to
the lessee. The lessor only
remains the legal owner of the
asset.
The lessee is only provided the use
of the asset for a certain time. Risk
incident to ownership belong wholly
to the lessor.

## 2. The lessee bears the risk of
obsolescence.
The
lessor
bears
the
risk
of
obsolescence.

## 3. The lessor is interested in his
rentals and not in the asset.
He must get his principal back
along with interest. Therefore,
the lease is non-cancellable
by either party.
As the lessor does not have difficulty
in leasing the same asset to other
willing lessee, the lease is kept
cancelable by the lessor.

## 4. The lessor enters into the
transaction only as financier.
He does not bear the cost of
repairs,
maintenance
or
operations.
Usually, the lessor bears cost of
repairs, maintenance or operations.
[p23]
TYPES OF FINANCING

## 5. The
lease
is
usually
full
payout, that is, the single
lease repays the cost of the
asset
together
with
the
interest.
The lease is usually non-payout,
since the lessor expects to lease the
same asset over and over again to
several users.

## 6.2 Other Types of Leases
(a)
Sales and Lease Back: Under this type of lease, the owner of an asset sells
the asset to a party (the buyer), who in turn leases back the same asset to the
owner in consideration of a lease rentals. Under this arrangement, the asset
is not physically exchanged but it all happen in records only.  The main
advantage of this method is that the lessee can satisfy himself completely
regarding the quality of an asset and after possession of the asset convert
the sale into a lease agreement.
Under this transaction, the seller assumes the role of lessee (as the same asset
which he has sold came back to him in the form of lease) and the buyer
assumes the role of a lessor (as asset purchased by him was leased back to
the seller). So, the seller gets the agreed selling price and the buyer gets the
lease rentals.
(b)
Leveraged Lease: Under this lease, a third party is involved besides lessor
and the lessee. The lessor borrows a part of the purchase cost (say 80%) of
the asset from the third party i.e., lender and asset so purchased is held as
security against the loan.  The lender is paid off from the lease rentals directly
by the lessee and the surplus after meeting the claims of the lender goes to
the lessor.  The lessor is entitled to claim depreciation allowance.
(c)
Sales-aid Lease: Under this lease contract, the lessor enters into a tie up with
a manufacturer for marketing the latter's product through his own leasing
operations, it is called a sales-aid lease. In consideration of the aid in sales,
the manufacturer may grant either credit or a commission to the lessor. Thus,
the lessor earns from both sources i.e. from lessee as well as the
manufacturer.
(d)
Close-ended and Open-ended Leases: In the close-ended lease, the assets
get transferred to the lessor at the end of lease, the risk of obsolescence,
residual value etc., remain with the lessor being the legal owner of the asset.
[p24]
In the open-ended lease, the lessee has the option of purchasing the asset at
the end of the lease period.
In recent years, leasing has become a popular source of financing in India. From
the lessee's point of view, leasing has the attraction of eliminating immediate cash
outflow, and the lease rentals can be deducted for computing the total income
under the Income tax Act. As against this, buying has the advantages of
depreciation allowance (including additional depreciation) and interest on
borrowed capital being tax-deductible. Thus, an evaluation of the two alternatives
is to be made in order to take a decision. Practical problems for lease financing are
covered at Final level in paper - Financial Services and Capital Markets.

## 7. SHORT-TERM SOURCES OF FINANCE
There are various sources available to meet short-term needs of finance. The
different sources are discussed below:
(i)
Trade Credit: It represents credit granted by suppliers of goods, etc., as an
incident of sale. The usual duration of such credit is 15 to 90 days. It generates
automatically in the course of business and is common to almost all business
operations. It can be in the form of an 'open account' or 'bills payable'.
Trade credit is preferred as a source of finance because it is without any
explicit cost and till a business is a going concern it keeps on rotating.
Another very important characteristic of trade credit is that it enhances
automatically with the increase in the volume of business.
(ii)
Accrued Expenses and Deferred (Unearned) Income: Accrued expenses
represent liabilities which a company has to pay for the services which it has
already received like wages, taxes, interest and dividends.  Such expenses
arise out of the day-to-day activities of the company and hence represent a
spontaneous source of finance.
Deferred income, on the other hand, reflects the amount of funds received
by a company in lieu of goods and services to be provided in the future.  Since
these receipts increase a company's liquidity, they are also considered to be
an important source of spontaneous finance.
[p25]
TYPES OF FINANCING

## (iii) Advances from Customers: Manufacturers and contractors engaged in
producing or constructing costly goods involving considerable length of
manufacturing or construction time usually demand advance money from
their customers at the time of accepting their orders for executing their
contracts or supplying the goods. This is a cost free source of finance and
really useful.

## (iv) Commercial Paper: A Commercial Paper is an unsecured money market
instrument issued in the form of a promissory note. The Reserve Bank of India
introduced the commercial paper scheme in the year 1989 with a view to
enabling highly rated corporate borrowers to diversify their sources of shortterm borrowings and to provide an additional instrument to investors.
Subsequently, in addition to the Corporate, Primary Dealers and All India
Financial Institutions have also been allowed to issue Commercial Papers.
Commercial papers are issued in denominations of ` 5 lakhs or multiples
thereof and the interest rate is generally linked to the yield on the one-year
government bond.
All eligible issuers are required to get the credit rating from Credit Rating
Information Services of India Ltd, (CRISIL), or the Investment Information and
Credit Rating Agency of India Ltd (ICRA) or the Credit Analysis and Research
Ltd (CARE) or the FITCH Ratings India Pvt. Ltd or any such other credit rating
agency as is specified by the Reserve Bank of India.
(v)
Treasury Bills: Treasury bills are a class of Central Government Securities.
Treasury bills, commonly referred to as T-Bills are issued by Government of
India to meet short term borrowing requirements with maturities ranging
between 14 to 364 days.

## (vi)  Certificates of Deposit (CD): The certificate of deposit is a document of title
similar to a time deposit receipt with a fixed maturity date of not less than 7
days up to a maximum of one year issued by a bank except that there is no
prescribed interest rate on such funds.
The main advantage of CD is that banker is not required to encash the deposit
before maturity period and the investor is assured of liquidity because he can
sell the CD in secondary market.
[p26]

## (vii)  Bank Advances: Banks receive deposits from public for different periods at
varying rates of interest. These funds are invested and lent in such a manner
that when required, they may be called back. Lending results in gross
revenues out of which costs, such as interest on deposits, administrative
costs, etc., are met and a reasonable profit is made. A bank's lending policy
is not merely profit motivated but has to also keep in mind the socioeconomic development of the country.
Some of the facilities provided by banks are:
(a)
Short Term Loans: In a loan account, the entire advance is disbursed
at one time either in cash or by transfer to the current account of the
borrower. It is a single advance and given against securities like shares,
government securities, life insurance policies and fixed deposit receipts,
etc. Except by way of interest and other charges, no further adjustments
are made in this account. Repayment under the loan account is made
either by way of repaying the full amount or by way of schedule of
repayments agreed upon as in case of term loans.
(b)
Overdraft: Under this facility, customers are allowed to withdraw in
excess of credit balance standing in their Current Account. A fixed limit
is, therefore, granted to the borrower within which the borrower is
allowed to overdraw his account. Though overdrafts are repayable on
demand, they generally continue for long periods by annual renewals
of the limits. This is a convenient arrangement for the borrower as he is
in a position to avail the limit sanctioned, according to his requirements.
Interest is charged on daily balances.
Since these accounts are operated in the same way as cash credit and
current accounts, cheque books are provided.
(c)
Clean Overdrafts: Request for clean advances are entertained only
from parties which are financially sound and having reputation for their
integrity. The bank has to rely upon the personal security of the
borrowers. Therefore, while entertaining proposals for clean advances;
banks exercise a good deal of restraint since they have no backing of
any tangible security. If the parties are already enjoying secured
advance facilities, this may be a point in favor and may be taken into
account while screening such proposals. The amount of turnover in the
[p27]
TYPES OF FINANCING
account, satisfactory dealings for considerable period and reputation in
the market are some of the factors which the bank normally see. As a
safeguard, banks take guarantees from other persons who are credit
worthy before granting this facility. A clean advance is generally granted
for a short period and must not be continued for long.
(d)
Cash Credits: Cash Credit is an arrangement under which a customer is
allowed an advance up to certain limit against credit granted by bank.
Under this arrangement, a customer need not borrow the entire amount
of advance at one time; he can only draw to the extent of his
requirements and deposit his surplus funds in his account. Interest is
not charged on the full amount of the advance but on the amount
actually availed by him.
Generally, cash credit limits are sanctioned against the security of
tradable goods by way of pledge or hypothecation. Though these
accounts are repayable on demand, banks usually do not recall such
advances, unless they are compelled to do so by adverse factors.
(e)
Advances against goods: Advances against goods occupy an
important place in total bank credit. They provide a reliable source of
repayment. Advances against them are safe and liquid. Also, there is a
quick turnover in goods, as they are in constant demand. So a banker
generally accepts them as security. Furthermore, goods are charged to
the bank either by way of pledge or by way of hypothecation. The term
'goods' includes all forms of movables which are offered to the bank as
security. They may be agricultural commodities or industrial raw
materials or partly finished goods.
(f)
Bills Purchased/ Discounted: Under this head, banks give advances
against the security of bills which may be clean or documentary. Bills
are sometimes purchased from approved customers in whose favour
limits are sanctioned. Before granting a limit, the banker satisfies
himself as to the credit worthiness of the drawer (the one who prepared
the bill of exchange, i.e. the creditor or the beneficiary or the payee).
Although the term 'bills purchased' gives the impression that the bank
becomes the owner or purchaser of such bills, in actual practice the
bank holds the bills only as security for the advance. The bank, in
[p28]
addition to the rights against the parties liable on the bills, can also
exercise a pledge's rights over the goods covered by the documents.
[Some forms of bank credit are also discussed in Chapter -9
(Management of Working Capital), Students are advised to also
refer the same]

## (viii) Financing of Export Trade by Banks: Exports play an important role in
accelerating the economic growth of developing countries like India. Out of
the several factors influencing export growth, credit is a very important factor
which enables exporters in efficiently executing their export orders. The
commercial banks provide short-term export finance mainly by way of pre
and post-shipment credit. Export finance is granted in Rupees as well as in
foreign currency.
In view of the importance of export credit in maintaining the pace of export
growth, RBI has initiated several measures in the recent years to ensure timely
and hassle-free flow of credit to the export sector. These measures, inter alia,
include rationalization and liberalization of export credit interest rates,
flexibility in repayment/prepayment of pre-shipment credit, special financial
package for large value exporters, export finance for agricultural exports,
Gold Card Scheme for exporters etc. Further, banks have been granted
freedom by RBI to source funds from abroad without any limit, exclusively for
the purpose of granting export credit in foreign currency, which has enabled
banks to increase their lending's under export credit in foreign currency
substantially during the last few years.
The advances by commercial banks for export financing are in the form of:
(i)
Pre-shipment finance i.e., before shipment of goods.
(ii)
Post-shipment finance i.e., after shipment of goods.
(i)
Pre-Shipment Finance: This generally takes the form of packing credit
facility; packing credit is an advance extended by banks to an exporter
for the purpose of buying, manufacturing, processing, packing,
shipping goods to overseas buyers. Any exporter, having at hand a firm
export order placed with him by his foreign buyer or an irrevocable
letter of credit opened in his favour, can approach a bank for availing
of packing credit. An advance so taken by an exporter is required to be
[p29]
TYPES OF FINANCING
liquidated within 180 days from the date of its commencement by
negotiation of export bills or receipt of export proceeds in an approved
manner. Thus, packing credit is essentially a short-term advance.
Normally, banks insist upon their customers to lodge with them
irrevocable letters of credit opened in favour of the customers by the
overseas buyers. The letter of credit and firm sale contracts not only
serve as evidence of a definite arrangement for realisation of the export
proceeds but also indicate the amount of finance required by the
exporter. Packing credit, in the case of customers of long standing, may
also be granted against firm contracts entered into by them with
overseas buyers.
Types of Packing Credit
(a)
Clean packing credit: This is an advance made available to an
exporter only on production of a firm export order or a letter of
credit without exercising any charge or control over raw material
or finished goods. It is a clean type of export advance. Each
proposal is weighed according to particular requirements of the
trade and credit worthiness of the exporter. A suitable margin has
to be maintained. Also, Export Credit Guarantee Corporation
(ECGC) cover should be obtained by the bank.
(b)
Packing credit against hypothecation of goods: Export finance
is made available on certain terms and conditions where the
exporter has pledge able interest and the goods are hypothecated
to the bank as security with stipulated margin. At the time of
utilising the advance, the exporter is required to submit, along
with the firm export order or letter of credit relative stock
statements and thereafter continue submitting them every
fortnight and/or whenever there is any movement in stocks.
(c)
Packing credit against pledge of goods: Export finance is made
available on certain terms and conditions where the exportable
finished goods are pledged to the banks with approved clearing
agents who will ship the same from time to time as required by
the exporter. The possession of the goods so pledged lies with
the bank and is kept under its lock and key.
[p30]
(d)
E.C.G.C. guarantee: Any loan given to an exporter for the
manufacture, processing, purchasing, or packing of goods meant
for export against a firm order qualifies for the packing credit
guarantee issued by Export Credit Guarantee Corporation.
(e)
Forward exchange contract: Another requirement of packing
credit facility is that if the export bill is to be drawn in a foreign
currency, the exporter should enter into a forward exchange
contact with the bank, thereby avoiding risk involved in a possible
change in the rate of exchange.
(ii)
Post-shipment Finance: It takes the following forms:
(a)
Purchase/discounting of documentary export bills: Finance is
provided to exporters by purchasing export bills drawn payable at
sight or by discounting usance export bills covering confirmed
sales and backed by documents including documents of the title
of goods such as bill of lading, post parcel receipts, or air
consignment notes.
(b)
E.C.G.C. Guarantee: Post-shipment finance, given to an exporter
by a bank through purchase, negotiation or discount of an export
bill against an order, qualifies for post-shipment export credit
guarantee. It is necessary, however, that exporters should obtain
a shipment or contracts risk policy of E.C.G.C. Banks insist on the
exporters to take a contracts shipments (comprehensive risks)
policy covering both political and commercial risks. The
Corporation, on acceptance of the policy, will fix credit limits for
individual exporters and the Corporation's liability will be limited
to the extent of the limit so fixed for the exporter concerned
irrespective of the amount of the policy.
(c)
Advance against export bills sent for collection: Finance is
provided by banks to exporters by way of advance against export
bills forwarded through them for collection, taking into account
the creditworthiness of the party, nature of goods exported,
usance, standing of drawee etc.
[p31]
TYPES OF FINANCING
(d)
Advance against duty draw backs, cash subsidy, etc.: To
finance export losses sustained by exporters, bank advance
against duty draw-back, cash subsidy etc., receivable by them
against export performance. Such advances are of clean nature;
hence necessary precaution should be exercised.
Bank providing finance in this manner see that the relative export bills
are either negotiated or forwarded for collection through it so that it is
in a position to verify the exporter's claims for duty draw-backs, cash
subsidy, etc. 'An advance so availed of by an exporter is required to be
liquidated within 180 days from the date of shipment of relative goods.
Other facilities extended to the exporters are as follows:
(i)
On behalf of approved exporters, banks establish letters of credit
on their overseas or up country suppliers.
(ii)
Guarantees for waiver of excise duty, etc. due performance of
contracts, bond in lieu of cash security deposit, guarantees for
advance payments etc., are also issued by banks to approved
clients.
(iii)
To approved clients undertaking exports on deferred payment
terms, banks also provide finance.
(iv)
Banks also endeavour to secure for their exporter-customers
status reports of their buyers and trade information on various
commodities through their correspondents.
(v)
Economic intelligence on various countries is also provided by
banks to their exporter clients.

## (ix) Inter Corporate Deposits: The companies can borrow funds for a short
period, say 6 months, from other companies which have surplus liquidity. The
rate of interest on inter corporate deposits varies depending upon the
amount involved and the time period.
(x)
Public Deposits: Public deposits are very important source of short-term and
medium term finances particularly due to credit squeeze by the Reserve Bank
of India. A company can accept public deposits subject to the stipulations of
Reserve Bank of India from time to time upto a maximum amount of 35 per
cent of its paid up capital and reserves.. These deposits may be accepted for
[p32]
a period of six months to three years. Public deposits are unsecured loans;
they should not be used for acquiring fixed assets since they are to be repaid
within a period of 3 years. These are mainly used to finance working capital
requirements.

## 8. OTHER SOURCES OF FINANCING
(i)
Seed Capital Assistance: The Seed Capital Assistance scheme is designed by
IDBI for professionally or technically qualified entrepreneurs and/or persons
possessing relevant experience, skills and entrepreneurial traits but lack
adequate financial resources. All the projects eligible for financial assistance
from IDBI, directly or indirectly through refinance are eligible under the
scheme.
The Seed Capital Assistance is interest free but carries a service charge of one
per cent per annum for the first five years and at increasing rate thereafter.
However, IDBI will have the option to charge interest at such rate as may be
determined by IDBI on the loan if the financial position and profitability of
the company so permits during the currency of the loan. The repayment
schedule is fixed depending upon the repaying capacity of the unit with an
initial moratorium up-to five years.
(ii)
Internal Cash Accruals: Existing profit-making companies which undertake
an expansion/ diversification programme may be permitted to invest a part
of their accumulated reserves or cash profits for creation of capital assets. In
such cases, past performance of the company permits the capital expenditure
from within the company by way of disinvestment of working/invested funds.
In other words, the surplus generated from operations, after meeting all the
contractual, statutory and working requirement of funds, is available for
further capital expenditure.

## (iii) Unsecured Loans: Unsecured loans are typically provided by promoters to
meet the promoters' contribution norm. These loans are subordinate to
institutional loans. The rate of interest chargeable on these loans should be
less than or equal to the rate of interest on institutional loans and interest
can be paid only after payment of institutional dues. These loans cannot be
[p33]
TYPES OF FINANCING
repaid without the prior approval of financial institutions. Unsecured loans
are considered as part of the equity for the purpose of calculating debt equity
ratio.

## (iv) Deferred Payment Guarantee: Many a time suppliers of machinery provide
deferred credit facility under which payment for the purchase of machinery
can be made over a period of time. The entire cost of the machinery is
financed  and  the  company  is  not required to contribute any amount
initially towards acquisition of the machinery. Normally, the supplier of
machinery insists that bank guarantee should be furnished by the buyer. Such
a facility does not have a moratorium period for repayment. Hence, it is
advisable only for an existing profit-making company.
(v)
Capital Incentives: The backward area development incentives available
often determine the location of a new industrial unit. These incentives usually
consist of a lump sum subsidy and exemption from or deferment of sales tax
and octroi duty. The quantum of incentives is determined by the degree of
backwardness of the location.
The special capital incentive in the form of a lump sum subsidy is a quantum
sanctioned by the implementing agency as a percentage of the fixed capital
investment subject to an overall ceiling. This amount forms a part of the longterm means of finance for the project. However, it may be mentioned that the
viability of the project must not be dependent on the quantum and
availability of incentives. Institutions, while appraising the project, assess the
viability of the project per se, without considering the impact of incentives on
the cash flows and profitability of the project.
Special capital incentives are sanctioned and released to the units only after they
have complied with the requirements of the relevant scheme. The requirements
may be classified into initial effective steps and final effective steps.
(vi) Deep Discount Bonds: Deep Discount Bonds is a form of zero-interest bonds.
These bonds are sold at a discounted value and on maturity, face value is paid
to the investors. In such bonds, there is no interest payout during lock in period.

## (vii) Secured Premium Notes: Secured Premium Notes is issued along with a
detachable warrant and is redeemable after a notified period of say 4 to 7
years. The conversion of detachable warrant into equity shares will have to be
done within time period notified by the company.
[p34]

## (viii) Zero Interest Fully Convertible Debentures: These are fully convertible
debentures which do not carry any interest. The debentures are compulsorily
and automatically converted after a specified period of time and holders
thereof are entitled to new equity shares of the company at predetermined
price. From the point of view of company, this kind of instrument is beneficial
in the sense that no interest is to be paid on it. If the share price of the
company in the market is very high then the investors tends to get equity
shares of the company at the lower rate.

## (ix) Zero Coupon Bonds: A Zero Coupon Bond does not carry any interest but it
is sold by the issuing company at a discount. The difference between the
discounted value and maturing or face value represents the interest to be
earned by the investor on such bonds.
(x)
Option Bonds: These are cumulative and non-cumulative bonds where
interest is payable on maturity or periodically. Redemption premium is also
offered to attract investors.

## (xi)  Inflation Bonds: Inflation Bonds are the bonds in which interest rate is
adjusted for inflation. Thus, the investor gets interest which is free from the
effects of inflation. For example, if the interest rate is 11 per cent and the
inflation is 5 per cent, the investor will earn 16 per cent meaning thereby that
the investor is protected against inflation.

## (xii) Floating Rate Bonds: This as the name suggests is bond where the interest
rate is not fixed and is allowed to float depending upon the market
conditions. This is an ideal instrument which can be resorted to by the issuer
to hedge themselves against the volatility in the interest rates. This has
become more popular as a money market instrument and has been
successfully issued by financial institutions like IDBI, ICICI etc.

## (xiii) High Yield Bonds (or Junk Bonds): Junk Bond is a bond that is rated below
investment grade by credit rating agencies. It has a low credit rating and a
high risk of default. Because of the higher risk, investors are compensated
with higher interest rates, which is why junk bonds are also called high-yield
bonds.
[p35]
TYPES OF FINANCING

## 9. INTERNATIONAL FINANCING
The essence of financial management is to raise and utilise the funds raised
effectively. There are various avenues for organisations to raise funds either
through internal or external sources. The sources of external financing include:
(i)
Commercial Banks: Like domestic loans, commercial banks all over the world
extend Foreign Currency (FC) loans also for international operations. These
banks also provide to overdraw over and above the loan amount.
(ii)
Development Banks: Development banks offer long & medium term loans
including FC loans. Many agencies at the national level offer a number of
concessions to foreign companies to invest within their country and to
finance exports from their countries e.g. EXIM Bank of USA.
(iii) Discounting of Trade Bills: This is used as a short-term financing method. It
is used widely in Europe and Asian countries to finance both domestic and
international business.

## (iv) International Agencies: A number of international agencies have emerged
over the years to finance international trade & business. The more notable
among them include The International Finance Corporation (IFC), The
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), The Asian
Development Bank (ADB), The International Monetary Fund (IMF), etc.
(v)
International Capital Markets: Today, modern organisations including
MNC's depend upon sizeable borrowings in Rupees as well as Foreign
Currency (FC). In order to cater to the needs of such organisations,
international capital markets have sprung all over the globe such as in
London.
In international capital market, the availability of FC is available under the
four main systems viz:
•
Euro-currency market
•
Export credit facilities
•
Bonds issues
•
Financial Institutions
[p36]
The origin of the Euro-currency market was with the dollar denominated bank
deposits and loans in Europe particularly in London. Euro-dollar deposits are
dollar denominated time deposits available at foreign branches of US banks
and at some foreign banks. Banks based in Europe accept dollar denominated
deposits and make dollar denominated deposits to the clients. This forms the
backbone of the Euro-currency market all over the globe. In this market, funds
are made available as loans through syndicated Euro-credit of instruments
such as FRN's, FR certificates of deposits.

## (vi) Financial Instruments: Some of the various financial instruments dealt with
in the international market are briefly described below:
(a)
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB): ECBs refer to commercial
loans (in the form of bank loans, buyers credit, suppliers credit,
securitised instruments (e.g. floating rate notes and fixed rate bonds)
availed from non-resident lenders with minimum average maturity of 3
years. Borrowers can raise ECBs through internationally recognised
sources like (i) international banks, (ii) international capital markets, (iii)
multilateral financial institutions such as the IFC, ADB etc, (iv) export
credit agencies, (v) suppliers of equipment, (vi) foreign collaborators
and (vii) foreign equity holders.
External Commercial Borrowings can be accessed under two routes viz
(i) Automatic route and (ii) Approval route. Under the Automatic route,
there is no need to take the RBI/Government approval whereas such
approval is necessary under the Approval route. Company's registered
under the Companies Act and NGOs engaged in micro finance activities
are eligible for the Automatic Route whereas Financial Institutions and
Banks dealing exclusively in infrastructure or export finance and the
ones which had participated in the textile and steel sector restructuring
packages as approved by the government are required to take the
Approval Route.
(b)
Euro Bonds: Euro bonds are debt instruments which are not
denominated in the currency of the country in which they are issued
e.g. a Yen note floated in Germany. Such bonds are generally issued in
a bearer form rather than as registered bonds and in such cases they
[p37]
TYPES OF FINANCING
do not contain the investor's names or the country of their origin. These
bonds are an attractive proposition to investors seeking privacy.
(c)
Foreign Bonds: These are debt instruments issued by foreign
corporations or foreign governments. Such bonds are exposed to
default risk, especially the corporate bonds. These bonds are
denominated in the currency of the country where they are issued,
however, in case these bonds are issued in a currency other than the
investors home currency, they are exposed to exchange rate risks. An
example of a foreign bond 'A British firm placing Dollar denominated
bonds in USA'.
(d)
Fully Hedged Bonds: As mentioned above, in foreign bonds, the risk
of currency fluctuations exists. Fully hedged bonds eliminate the risk by
selling in forward markets the entire stream of principal and interest
payments.
(e)
Medium Term Notes (MTN): Certain issuers need frequent financing
through the Bond route including that of the Euro bond. However, it
may be costly and ineffective to go in for frequent issues. Instead,
investors can follow the MTN programme. Under this programme,
several lots of bonds can be issued, all having different features e.g.
different coupon rates, different currencies etc. The timing of each lot
can be decided keeping in mind the future market opportunities. The
entire documentation and various regulatory approvals can be taken at
one point of time.
(f)
Floating Rate Notes (FRN): These are issued up to seven years
maturity. Interest rates are adjusted to reflect the prevailing exchange
rates. They provide cheaper money than foreign loans.
(g)
Euro Commercial Papers (ECP): ECPs are short term money market
instruments. They have maturity period of less than one year. They are
usually designated in US Dollars.
(h)
Foreign Currency Option (FC): A FC Option is the right (and not the
obligation) to buy or sell, foreign currency at a certain specified price
on or before a specified date. It provides a hedge against financial and
economic risks.
[p38]
(i)
Foreign Currency Futures: FC Futures are obligations (and not the
right) to buy or sell a specified foreign currency in the present for
settlement at a future date.
(j)
Foreign Euro Bonds: In domestic capital markets of various countries
the Bonds issues referred to above are known by different names such
as Yankee Bonds in the US, Swiss Frances in Switzerland, Samurai Bonds
in Tokyo and Bulldogs in UK.
(k)
Euro Convertible Bonds: A convertible bond is a debt instrument
which gives the holders of the bond an option to convert the bonds
into a pre-determined number of equity shares of the company. Usually
the price of the equity shares at the time of conversion will have a
premium element. These bonds carry a fixed rate of interest and if the
issuer company so desires may also include a Call Option (where the
issuer company has the option of calling/ buying the bonds for
redemption prior to the maturity date) or a Put Option (which gives the
holder the option to put/sell his bonds to the issuer company at a predetermined date and price).
(l)
Euro Convertible Zero Bonds: These bonds are structured as a
convertible bond. No interest is payable on the bonds. But conversion
of bonds takes place on maturity at a pre- determined price. Usually
there is a five years maturity period and they are treated as a deferred
equity issue.

## (m) Euro Bonds with Equity Warrants: These bonds carry a coupon rate
determined by market rates. The warrants are detachable. Pure bonds
are traded at a discount. Fixed Income Funds Management may like to
invest for the purposes of regular income in this case.
(n)
Environmental, Social and Governance-linked bonds (ESG): These
bonds carry a responsibility of the issuer company to prioritize optimal
environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors. Investing in ESG
bonds is considered as socially responsible investing. ESG bonds can
be project-based - green bonds and social bonds; and target-based -
sustainability-linked bonds (SLBs).
[p39]
TYPES OF FINANCING
♦
Green bonds: These are the most popular ESG bonds that are
issued by a financial, non-financial or public institution, where the
bond proceeds are used to finance "green projects". Green
projects are aimed at positive environmental and/or climate
impact including the cultivation of eco-friendly technology. India
is the second-largest green bond market. For example: Ghaziabad
Municipal Corporation (GMC) becomes the first Municipal
Corporation to raise ` 150 crore from Green Bond in the Year
2021.
♦
Social bonds: These bonds finance the socially impactful projects.
The projects here are related to the social concerns such as
Human rights, Equality, animal welfare etc. For example, "Vaccine
bonds" are social bonds, issued to fund the vaccination of
vulnerable childrens and protection of people in lower income
countries.
♦
Sustainability-linked
bonds
(SLBs):
These
bonds
are
combination of green bonds and social bonds. Proceeds of SLBs
are not meant for a specific project but for general corporate
purpose to achieve Key Performance Indicator (KPIs). For example:
UltraTech Cement raises US$ 400 million through India's first
sustainability-linked bonds in year 2021. The company aims to
reduce carbon emissions through the life of bond of 10 years.

## (vii) Euro Issues by Indian Companies: Euro issuance refers to the sources of
funding or capital that can be accessed to raise money outside the home
country in foreign currency. Indian companies are permitted to raise foreign
currency resources through issue of ordinary equity shares through Global
Depository Receipts (GDRs)/ American Depository Receipts (ADRs) and / or
ESG bonds
Project-based
Green bonds
Social bonds
Target-based
Sustainability linked
bonds (SLBs)
[p40]
issue of Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds (FCCB) to foreign investors i.e.
institutional investors or individuals (including NRIs) residing abroad. Such
investment is treated as Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). The government
guidelines on these issues are covered under the Foreign Currency
Convertible Bonds and Ordinary Shares (through depositary receipt
mechanism) Scheme, 1993 and notifications issued after the implementation
of the said scheme.
(a)
American Depository Receipts (ADRs): These are securities offered by
non-US companies who want to list on any of the US exchange. Each
ADR represents a certain number of a company's regular shares. ADRs
allow US investors to buy shares of these companies without the costs
of investing directly in a foreign stock exchange.
The Indian companies have preferred the GDRs to ADRs because the US
market exposes them to a higher level of responsibility than a European
listing in the areas of disclosure, costs, liabilities and timing. The
regulations are somewhat more stringent and onerous, even for
companies already listed and held by retail investors in their home
country. The most onerous aspect of a US listing for the companies is
to provide full, half yearly and quarterly accounts in accordance with, or
at least reconciled with US GAAPs.
(b)
Global Depository Receipts (GDRs): These are negotiable certificates
held in the bank of one country representing a specific number of
shares of a stock traded on the exchange of another country. These
financial instruments are used by companies to raise capital in either
dollars or Euros. These are mainly traded in European countries and
particularly in London.
ADRs/GDRs and the Indian Scenario: Indian companies are shedding
their reluctance to tap the US markets. Infosys Technologies was the
first Indian company to be listed on Nasdaq in 1999. However, the first
Indian firm to issue sponsored GDR or ADR was Reliance industries
Limited. Beside these two companies there are several other Indian
firms which are also listed in the overseas bourses. These are Wipro,
MTNL, State Bank of India, Tata Motors, Dr. Reddy's Lab, etc.
[p41]
TYPES OF FINANCING
(c)
Indian Depository Receipts (IDRs): The concept of the depository
receipt mechanism which is used to raise funds in foreign currency
has been applied in the Indian Capital Market through the issue of
Indian Depository Receipts (IDRs). IDRs are similar to ADRs/GDRs in the
sense that foreign companies can issue IDRs to raise funds from the
Indian Capital Market in the same lines as an Indian company uses
ADRs/GDRs to raise foreign capital. The IDRs are listed and traded in
India in the same way as other Indian securities are traded.

## 10. CONTEMPORARY SOURCES OF FUNDING
(i)
Crowd funding: In simple terms, crowdfunding means raising money for an
individual or organisation from a group of people to fund a project, typically
via internet (social media and crowdfunding websites). It generally involves
collecting funds from family, friends, strangers, corporates and many more in
exchange of equity (known as Equity funding), loans (known as P2P lending)
or nothing at all (i.e. donation). This source of funding also helps start-up to
substantiate demand for their product before entering into production.
In the crowdfunding process, three parties are involved i.e. fund raiser,
mediator and fund investor. The platforms (mediator) may also charge certain
fees in the form of processing fee, transaction fee, etc. either as a fixed
amount or a percentage or in combination of both.
(ii)
Equity funding: Equity crowdfunding is a mechanism where investor invests
money in an organisation and receive securities of that organisation in return.
Every investor would be entitled to a stake in the organisation depending on
their investment. The digital nature of crowdfunding targets large number of
investors with small contributions. This type of funding is mostly adopted by
startups. Some of the platforms offering equity crowdfunding are StartEngine,
EquityNet, SeedInvest, etc.

## (iii) Peer-to-Peer (P2P) lending: It is that category of crowdfunding where
lenders match with the borrowers in order to provide unsecured loans
through online platform. The fund raised are paid back by the borrowers with
interest, though this kind of lending involves certain risk of defaults (just as
the banks bear in the case of conventional method of lending). Anyone
interested in investing money under P2P lending can visit the P2P lending
[p42]
platforms and choose amongst borrowers considering risk & returns. Some
of the platforms offering P2P lending are i2iFunding, Lendbox, Faircent,
RupeeCircle, etc.

## (iv) Start-up funding: A start-up company being newly formed needs fund
before starting any project. However, as a start-up, it is difficult to manage
loans from bank, leaving crowdfunding as one of the sources of finance.
Through crowdfunding, a start-up company can raise money from large
group of people. The crowdfunding may be in the form of equity funding,
P2P lending or both.
(v)
Donation-based Crowdfunding: It is a source of finance where large group
of people donate money as a charity for some cause with no expectation of
any ownership or debt. Some of the platforms that are used for donationbased crowdfunding are GoFundMe (used for donations against medical
needs, education, etc.), Ketto (used for donation against medical needs),
FuelADream (used for donation against charity projects, new ideas), etc.
SUMMARY
♦
There are several sources of finance/funds available to any company.
♦
All the financial needs of a business may be grouped into the long term or
short-term financial needs.
♦
There are different sources of funds available to meet long term financial
needs of the business. These sources may be broadly classified into share
capital (both equity and preference) and debt.
♦
Another important source of long-term finance is venture capital financing. It
refers to financing of new high risky venture promoted by qualified
entrepreneurs who lack experience and funds to give shape to their ideas.
♦
Debt Securitisation is another important source of finance and it is a process
in which illiquid assets are pooled into marketable securities that can be sold
to investors.
♦
Leasing is a very popular source to finance equipment. It is a contract between
the owner and user of the asset over a specified period of time in which the
asset is purchased initially by the lessor (leasing company) and thereafter
[p43]
TYPES OF FINANCING
leased to the user (lessee company) who pays a specified rent at periodical
intervals.
♦
Some of the short terms sources of funding are trade credit, advances from
customers, commercial paper, and bank advances etc.
♦
To support export, the commercial banks provide short term export finance
mainly by way of pre and post-shipment credit.
♦
Every day new creative financial products keep on entering the market. Some
of the examples are seed capital assistance, option bonds, inflation bonds,
masala bonds etc.
♦
Today, the businesses are allowed to source funds from international market
also. Some of important products of international financing are External
Commercial Borrowings (ECB), ESG-linked bonds, Euro Bonds etc.
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs)

## 1. Equity shares:
(a)
Have an unlimited life, and voting rights and receive dividends
(b)
Have a limited life, with no voting rights but receive dividends
(c)
Have a limited life, and voting rights and receive dividends
(d)
Have an unlimited life, and voting rights but receive no dividends

## 2. External sources of finance do not include:
(a)
Debentures
(b)
Retained earnings
(c)
Overdrafts
(d)
Leasing

## 3. Internal sources of finance do not include:
(a)
Better management of working capital
(b)
Ordinary shares
[p44]
(c)
Retained earnings
(d)
Reserve and Surplus

## 4. In preference shares:
(a)
Dividends are not available
(b)
Limited voting rights are available
(c)
Are not part of a company's share capital
(d)
Interest can be received

## 5. A debenture:
(a)
Is a long-term loan
(b)
Does not require security
(c)
Is a short-term loan
(d)
Receives dividend payments

## 6. Debt capital refers to:
(a)
Money raised through the sale of shares.
(b)
Funds raised by borrowing that must be repaid.
(c)
Factoring accounts receivable.
(d)
Inventory loans.

## 7. The most popular source of short-term funding is:
(a)
Factoring.
(b)
Trade credit.
(c)
Family and friends.
(d)
Commercial banks.

## 8. Marketable securities are primarily:
(a)
short-term debt instruments.
(b)
short-term equity securities.
(c)
long-term debt instruments.
(d)
long-term equity securities.
[p45]
TYPES OF FINANCING

## 9. Which of the following marketable securities is the obligation of a commercial
bank?
(a)
Commercial paper
(b)
Negotiable certificate of deposit
(c)
Repurchase agreement
(d)
T-bills

## 10. Reserves & Surplus are which form of financing?
(a)
Security Financing
(b)
Internal Financing
(c)
Loans Financing
(d)
International Financing

## 11. With reference to `IFC Masala Bonds', which of the statements given below
is/are correct?

## 1. The International Finance Corporation, which offered these bonds, is an
arm of the World Bank.

## 2. They are rupee-denominated bonds and are a source of debt financing
for the public and private sector.
(a)
1 only
(b)
2 only
(c)
Both 1 and 2
(d)
Neither 1 nor 2
12.  External Commercial Borrowings can be accessed through ..............
(a)
only automatic route
(b)
only approval route
(c)
both automatic and approval route
(d)
neither automatic nor approval route
[p46]
Theoretical Questions
1. DESCRIBE the different types of Packing Credit.
2. DISCUSS the advantages of raising funds by issue of equity shares.
3. EXPLAIN in brief the features of Commercial Paper.
4. DISCUSS the features of Secured Premium Notes (SPNs).
5. DISCUSS ADRs and GDRs.
6. DISTINGUISH between Preference Shares and Debentures.
ANSWERS
Answers to the MCQs
1.
(a)
2.
(b)
3.
(b)
4.
(b)
5.
(a)
6.
(b)
7.
(b)
8.
(a)
9.
(b)
10.
(b)
11.
(c)
12.
(c)
Answers to Theoretical Questions

## 1. Please refer paragraph 7
2. Please refer paragraph 3.1

## 3. Please refer paragraph 7

## 4. Please refer paragraph 8

## 5. Please refer paragraph 9
6. Please refer paragraph 3.4