[p1]
LEARNING OUTCOMES
CHAPTER
1
INTRODUCTION TO
STRATEGIC
MANAGEMENT
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
♦
Identify strategic decisions and behaviours within a firm.  And discuss the
relevance thereof in the modern business world.
♦
Acknowledge and appreciate the limitations of strategic management. And
accept that all decisions need not be strategic.
♦
Formulate Strategic Intent - Vision, Mission, Goals and Values.  Analyse how each
of these plays an important role in the development of an overall business
strategy.
♦
Describe strategic levels in organizations (Corporate, Business, Functional and
Network of relation between three levels); and discuss the role each plays in final
decision making and real execution of plans.
"The company without a strategy is willing to try anything."
Michael Porter
"Strategy is not the consequence of planning, but the opposite: it's the
starting point."
Henry Mintzberg
[p2]

## 1.1 INTRODUCTION
This chapter is an attempt to highlight the concepts and significance of 'strategic
management'. With increased competition, business management has acquired a
strategic dimension. All executives and professionals, including Chartered
Accountants, working towards growth of businesses, must possess sound
knowledge of concepts of strategic management.
Meaning and nature of
Concept of Strategy
Importance of Strategic
Management
Limitations of Strategic
Management
Strategic Intent
Strategic Levels in
Organisations
Corporate Level
Business Level
Functional Level
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
[p3]

## 1.2 MEANING AND NATURE OF STRATEGIC
MANAGEMENT
To understand the concept of strategic management, we need to have a basic
understanding of the term management. The term 'management' is used in two
senses, such as:
(a)
It is used with reference to a key group in an organisation in-charge of its
affairs. In relation to an organisation, management is the chief organ
entrusted with the task of making it a purposeful and productive entity, by
undertaking the task of bringing together and integrating the disorganised
resources of manpower, money, material, and technology, which are then
combined into a functioning whole.
An organisation becomes a unified functioning system when management
systematically mobilises and utilises the diverse resources efficiently and
effectively. The survival and success of an organisation depends to a large
extent on the competence and character of its management. Management has
to also facilitate organisational change and adaptation for effective interaction
with the environment.
(b)
The term 'Management' is also used with reference to a set of interrelated
functions and processes carried out by the management of an organisation
(the key group of individuals mentioned in point (a) to attain its objectives).
These functions include Planning, Organising, Directing, Staffing and Control.
The functions or sub-processes of management are wide-ranging but closely
interrelated. They range all the way from determination of the goals, design
of the organisation, mobilisation and acquisition of resources, allocation of
tasks and resources among the personnel and activity units and installation of
control system to ensure that what is planned is achieved.
Management is an influence process to make things happen, to gain
command over phenomena, to induce and direct events and people in a
particular manner. Influence is backed by power, competence, knowledge and
resources. Managers formulate organisational goals, values and strategies, to
cope with, to adapt and to adjust themselves with the behaviour and changes
in the environment.
[p4]
The strategic management process is the set of activities that firm managers
undertake to put their firms in the best possible position to compete successfully
in the marketplace. Strategic management is made up of several distinct activities:
developing the firm's vision and mission; strategic analysis; developing objectives;
creating, choosing, and implementing strategies; and measuring and evaluating
performance.

## 1.3 CONCEPT OF STRATEGY
In the context of business, the application of the term 'Strategy'  relates to the ways,
the business decides to respond to dynamic and often hostile external forces while
pursuing their vision, mission and ultimate objectives.
The very incorporation of the idea of strategy into business organizations is
intended to unravel complexity and to reduce uncertainty caused by changes in the
environment. Strategy seeks to relate the goals of the organization to the means
of achieving them. Strategy is the game plan that the management of a business
uses to take market position, conduct its operations, attract and satisfy customers,
compete successfully, and achieve organizational objectives.
To the extent, the term strategy is associated with unified design and action for
achieving major goals, gaining command over the situation with a long-range
perspective and securing a critically advantageous position, its implications for
corporate functioning are obvious.
We may define the term 'strategy' as a long-range blueprint of an organization's
desired image, direction and destination, i.e., what it wants to be, what it wants to
do, how it wants to do things, and where it wants to go. Following are also
important other definitions are to understand the term:
Igor H. Ansoff
:
The common thread among the organization's
activities and product-markets that defines the
essential nature of business that the organization
has or planned to be in future.
William F. Glueck
:
A unified, comprehensive and integrated plan
designed to assure that the basic objectives of the
enterprise are achieved.
[p5]
Strategy is consciously considered and flexibly designed scheme of corporate
intent and action to mobilise resources, to direct human effort and behaviour, to
handle events and problems, to perceive and utilise opportunities, and to meet
challenges and threats for corporate survival and success.
Strategy is meant to fill in the need of organizations for a sense of dynamic
direction, focus and cohesiveness. Objectives and goals are essential to give a
direction to business, but they do not fill in the need alone. Strategy provides an
integrated framework for the top management to search for, evaluate and exploit
beneficial opportunities, to perceive and meet potential threats and crisis, to make
full use of resources and strengths, and to offset corporate weaknesses.
Important to note that strategy is no substitute for sound, alert and responsible
management. It must be recognised that strategy can never be perfect, flawless
and optimal. It is in the very nature of strategy that it is flexible and pragmatic to
take care of sudden emergencies, pressures, and avoid failures and frustrations. In
a sound strategy, allowances are made for possible miscalculations and
unanticipated events.
In large organisations, strategies are formulated at:
♦
the corporate,
♦
divisional, and
♦
functional levels
Corporate strategies are formulated by the top managers. Such strategies include
the determination of the plans for expansion and growth, vertical and horizontal
integration, diversification, takeovers and mergers, new investment and divestment
areas, R & D projects, and so on. These corporate wide strategies need to be
operationalized by divisional and functional strategies regarding product lines,
production volumes, quality ranges, prices, product promotion, market penetration,
purchasing sources, personnel development and like. This is discussed in detail in
further separate topics.
Strategy is partly proactive and partly reactive: A company's strategy is typically a
blend of:
♦
Proactive actions on the part of managers to improve the company's market
position and financial performance.
[p6]
♦
Reactions to unanticipated developments and fresh market conditions in the
dynamic business environment.
In other words, a company uses both proactive and reactive strategies to cope up
the uncertain business environment. Proactive strategy is planned strategy whereas
reactive strategy is adaptive reaction to changing circumstances.
Figure: A company's actual strategy is partly planned & partly reactive
As is evident from the figure, a company's current strategy flows from both
previously initiated actions and business approaches that are working well enough
to merit continuation, as well as newly initiated managerial decisions and actions
that strengthen the company's overall position and performance. Thus, strategy
partly is deliberate and proactive, standing as the product of management's
analysis and strategic thinking about the company's situation and its conclusions
about how to position the company in the marketplace and tackle the task of
competing for buyer's patronage.
However, not every strategic move is the result of proactive planning and deliberate
management design. Things happen that cannot be fully anticipated or planned
for. When market and competitive conditions take an unexpected turn or some
aspect of a company's strategy hits a stone wall, some kind of strategic reaction or
adjustment is required. Hence, partially, a company's strategy is always developed
New initiatives plus ongoing
strategy elements continued
from prior periods
Adaptive reactions to
changing circumstances
Company
experiences,
know-how
resources,
Strength,
Weaknesses
and
Competition
capabilities
Abandoned strategy
elements
Proactive strategy elements
Reactive strategy elements
Latest
version
of
company
strategy
(Actual
strategy)
[p7]
as a reasoned response to unforeseen developments in the business environment
as well as the situations within the firm.
Crafting a strategy thus involves stitching together a proactive/intended strategy
based on prior successful experience and then adapting pieces of successful
reactions as circumstances surrounding the company's situation change or better
options emerge - a reactive/adaptive strategy.
Strategy helps unravel complexity and reduce uncertainty caused by changes in the
environment. It also means to identify existing problems and solving them by
executing revolutionary ideas. It would be pertinent to mention one such example
in the recent times, that is UPI, Unified Payments Interface. UPI has changed the
entire digital payments landscape in India and has now even gone global. A true
example of Made in India for the world. It was all because of a well-planned
identification of existing problem statement, formulating a strategy putting it to
perfect execution.
Now that we have understood about strategy as a concept, the chapters to follow
would focus more on how organisations plan and execute their strategies via
Strategic Management.
Is this a Strategy?
A ketchup brand making a healthier ketchup with less sugar and preservatives to
attract more customers by letting parents feel safe about their kid's consuming
ketchup. Can this be called a strategy?
Yes, it is a business strategy to fight competition and to adapt with changing
external environment (people becoming health conscious is external
environment factor)

## 1.4 STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT - IMPORTANCE
AND LIMITATIONS
The importance of Strategic Management essentially lies in enabling an
organisation to perform better than its competitors and its own past and present
performance.  That is, delivering superior returns to the investors, superior value to
the customers and superior performance vis-à-vis expectations of the employees,
[p8]
suppliers, government and society. The overall objectives of strategic management
are two-fold:
♦
To create competitive advantage (something unique and valued by the
customer), so that the company can outperform the competitors in all aspects
of organisational performance.
♦
To guide the company successfully through all changes in the environment.
That is to react in the right manner.
The organizational operations are highly influenced by the increasing rate of
change in the environment and the ripple effect created on the organization.
Changes can be external to the firm, or they may be introduced in the firm by the
managers. It may manifest in the blurring of industry and firm boundaries, driven
by technology, deregulation, or, through globalization. The tasks of crafting,
implementing and executing company strategies are the heart and soul of
managing a business enterprise.
To put the concept in a few words, the term 'strategic management' refers to the
managerial process of developing a strategic vision, setting objectives, crafting a
strategy, implementing and evaluating the strategy, and finally initiating corrective
adjustments were deemed appropriate. The process does not end, it keeps going
on in a cyclic manner.
Strategic management involves developing the company's vision, environmental
scanning
(both
external
and
internal),
strategy
formulation,
strategy
implementation and evaluation and control.
Originally called, business policy, strategic management emphasizes the
monitoring and evaluation of external opportunities and threats in the light of a
company's strengths and weaknesses and designing strategies for the survival and
growth of the company.

## 1.4.1 Importance of Strategic Management
Formulation of strategies and their implementation have become essential for all
organizations for their survival and growth in the present turbulent business
environment. 'Survival of the fittest 'as propagated by Charles Darwin is the only
principle of survival for all organizations, where 'fittest' are not the 'largest' or
[p9]
'strongest' organizations but those who can change and adapt successfully to the
changes in business environment.
Many business giants have followed the path of extinction failing to manage drastic
changes in the business environment. For example, Bajaj Scooters, LML Scooters,
Murphy Radio, BPL Television, Videocon, Nokia, Kodak and so on. Thus, it becomes
imperative to study Business Strategy.
Businesses follows the war principle of 'win or lose', and only in a small number of
cases, win-win situation arises. Hence, each organization has to build its
competitive advantage over the competitors in the business warfare in order to
win.  This can be done only by following the process of strategic management -
strategic analysis, formulation and implementation, evaluation and control of
strategies.
The major benefits of strategic management are:
♦
The strategic management gives a direction to the company to move ahead.
It helps define the goals and mission. It helps management to define realistic
objectives and goals which are in line with the vision of the company.
♦
Strategic management helps organisations to be proactive instead of reactive
in shaping its future. Organisations are able to analyse and take actions
instead of being mere spectators. Thereby they are able to control their own
destiny in a better manner. It helps them in working within vagaries of
environment and shaping it, instead of getting carried away by its turbulence
or uncertainties.
♦
Strategic management provides frameworks for all major decisions of an
enterprise such as decisions on businesses, products, markets, manufacturing
facilities, investments and organisational structure. It provides better
guidance to entire organisation on the crucial point - what it is trying to
achieve.
♦
Strategic management seeks to prepare the organisation to face the future
and act as pathfinder to various business opportunities. Organisations are
able to identify the available opportunities and identify ways and means to
reach them.
[p10]
♦
Strategic management serves as a corporate defence mechanism against
mistakes and pitfalls. It helps organisations to avoid costly mistakes in
product market choices or investments.
♦
Strategic management helps to enhance the longevity of the business. With
the state of competition and dynamic environment it may be challenging for
organisations to survive in the long run. It helps the organization to take a
clear stand in the related industry and makes sure that it is not just surviving
on luck. Actions over expectations is what strategic management ensures.
♦
Strategic management helps the organisation to develop certain core
competencies and competitive advantages that would facilitate assist in its
fight for survival and growth.
Importance of
Strategic
Management
Defines the
goals and
mission
Helps the
organisation
to develop
certain core
competencies
and
competitive
Helps
organisations
to be proactive
instead of
reactive in
shaping its
future
Provides
framework for
all major
decisions of an
enterprise.
Prepares the
organisation
to face the
future
Serves as a
corporate
defense
mechanism
against
mistakes and
pitfalls.
Enhance the
longevity of
the business.
[p11]
The importance of strategic management lies in delivering superior organizational
performance than that would otherwise obtain. In the competitive context it implies
performance superior to that of the competitors or more generally, above average
performance.
It must however be realized that in search of meaning and purpose organisations
may undertake decisions and activities that may not measure up to being
"strategic." Belief in diversity, inclusion & equity; improving availability, affordability
and accessibility of products and services to the opportunity deprived sections etc.,
greater workplace democracy are some of the decisions and behaviours that are
worthy on their own count. They may not serve a strategic purpose in the strict
sense of the term.

## 1.4.2 Limitations of Strategic Management
The presence of strategic management cannot counter all hindrances and always
achieve success. There are limitations too, attached to strategic management. Let
us discuss them briefly:
♦
Environment is highly complex and turbulent. It is difficult to understand the
complex environment and exactly pinpoint how it will shape-up in future. The
organisational estimate about its future shape may awfully go wrong and
jeopardise all strategic plans. The environment affects as the organisation has
to deal with suppliers, customers, governments and other external factors.
Thus, relying on a business strategy blindly could go absolutely wrong if the
environment is turbulent. For example, Two-Wheeler Electric Vehicles brands
counted on strategic benefits they would have because of the huge push from
the government for electric mobility. However, customers are getting reluctant
to purchase EVs due to the safety concerns amid the frequent incidents of
battery's catching fire. So, strategy cannot overcome a turbulent environment.
♦
Strategic management is a time-consuming process. Organisations spend a
lot of time in preparing, communicating the strategies that may impede daily
operations and negatively impact the routine business. Planning and
strategizing are important but putting them in action is where the actual
success lies. Similar to us students, planning and strategizing what to study,
from where and at what time of the day to study, consumes so much of our
actual study time that by the time we have to study, we are almost exhausted.
[p12]
Similarly in business if way too much time is spent on planning and
formulating, then it might not be as fruitful.
♦
Strategic management is a costly process. Strategic management adds a lot
of expenses to an organization. Expert strategic planners need to be engaged,
efforts are made for analysis of external and internal environments devise
strategies and properly implement. These can be really costly for
organisations with limited resources particularly when small and medium
organisation create strategies to compete. Strategic Management requires
experts, and these experts are costly resources. Thus, the process as a whole
required good amount of funds to be spent.
♦
In a competitive scenario, where all organisations are trying to move
strategically, it is difficult to clearly estimate the competitive responses to a
firm's strategies. It is quite difficult to gauge the strategic planning of
competitors because most of these decisions are taken within closed doors
by the top management. For example, Apple changed the market dynamics
of the speaker industry by choosing to remove 3.5mm audio jack from iPhones.
Now, to be relevant in the market, all major speaker brands had to put
concentrated efforts to develop their own true wireless speakers (TWS) and
compete with new entrants.
[p13]
Why do businesses opt for strategic management even with its limitation?
Strategic Management is a time consuming and costly process, yet all
organization's want to do indulge into it? Why?
Because even though it has its limitations, its importance outweighs its
shortcomings. A business cannot operate and succeed without proper strategic
management.

## 1.5 STRATEGIC
INTENT
(VISION,
MISSION,
GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND VALUES)
Strategic Management is defined as a dynamic process of formulation,
implementation, evaluation, and control of strategies to realise the organisation's
strategic intent. Strategic intent refers to purposes of what the organisation strives
for senior managers must define "what they want to do" and "why they want to
do".
"Why they want to do" represents strategic intent of the firm. Clarity in strategic
intent is extremely important for the future success and growth of the enterprise,
irrespective of its nature and size.
Strategic intent can be understood as the philosophical base of strategic
management. It implies the purposes, which an organisation endeavours to
achieve. It is a statement that provides a perspective of the means, which will lead
the organisation, reach its vision in the long run. Strategic intent gives an idea of
what the organisation desires to attain in future. It answers the question what the
organisation strives or stands for? It indicates the long-term market position, which
the organisation desires to create or occupy and the opportunity for exploring new
possibilities.
Strategic intent provides the framework within which the firm would adopt a
predetermined direction and would operate to achieve strategic objectives.
Strategic intent could be in the form of vision and mission statements for the
organisation at the corporate level. It could be expressed as the business definition
and business model at the business level of the organisation.
[p14]
Strategic intent is generally stated in broad terms but when stated in precise terms
it is an expression of aims to be achieved operationally, i.e., goals and objectives.
1. Vision: Vision implies the blueprint of the company's future position. It
describes where the organisation wants to land. It depicts the organisation's
aspirations and provides a glimpse of what the organisation would like to
become in future. Every sub system of the organisation is required to follow
its vision.

## 2. Mission: Mission delineates the firm's business, its goals and ways to reach
the goals. It explains the reason for the existence of the firm in the society. It
is designed to help potential shareholders and investors understand the
purpose of the firm. A mission statement helps to identify, 'what business the
firm undertakes.' It defines the present capabilities, activities, customer focus
and role in society.
3. Goals and Objectives: These are the base of measurement. Goals are the end
results, that the organisation attempts to achieve. On the other hand,
objectives are time-based measurable targets, which help in the
accomplishment of goals. These are the end results which are to be attained
with the help of an overall plan, over the particular period. However, in
practice, no distinction is made between goals and objectives and both the
terms are used interchangeably.
The vision, mission, business definition, and business model explain the
philosophy of the organisation but the goals and objectives represent the
results to be achieved in multiple areas of business.
While Strategic Intent is the purpose that an organisation aims to achieve,
Values form the omnipresent foundation of each and every decision that the
management takes. An organisation without values is like an organisation with
no real intent. Let us understand a bit more about values from a business
perspective.

## 4. Values/ Value System: Values are the deep-rooted principles which guide an
organisation's decisions and actions. Collins and Porras succinctly define core
values as being inherent and sacrosanct; they can never be compromised,
either for convenience or short-term economic gain. Values often reflect the
values of the company's founders—Hewlett-Packard's celebrated "HP Way" is
[p15]
Va
an example. They are the source of a company's distinctiveness and must be
maintained at all costs.
Component of Strategic Intent

## 1.5.1 Vision
Very early in the strategy making process, a company's senior managers must
consider the issue of what directional path the company should take and what
changes in the company's product-market-customer-technology focus would
improve its current market position and future prospects. Deciding to commit the
company to one path versus other pushes managers to draw some carefully
reasoned conclusions about how to try to modify the company's business makeup
and the market position it should stake out.
Top management's views about the company's direction and the productcustomer-market-technology focus constitute the strategic vision for the company.
Strategic vision delineates management's aspirations for the business, providing a
panoramic view of the "where we are to go" and a convincing rationale for why this
makes good business sense for the company. Strategic vision thus points out a
particular direction, charts a strategic path to be followed in future, and moulding
Goals and
Objective
Mission
Vision
Strategic
Intent
Values/Value System
[p16]
organisational identity. A clearly articulated strategic vision communicates
management's aspirations to stakeholders and helps steer the energies of company
personnel in a common direction. For instance, Henry Ford's vision of a car in every
garage had power because it captured the imagination of others, aided internal
efforts to mobilize the Ford Motor Company's resources, and served as a reference
point for gauging the merits of the company's strategic actions.
♦
HDFC Bank Ltd., one of the largest banks in India has clearly defined its
Vision of being a world class Indian bank. This vision helps them keep in mind,
"where we want to go", as the central thought of their strategic decision
making.
♦
LIC Ltd., the largest insurance company of India has defined its visions as - A
trans-nationally competitive financial conglomerate of significance to
societies and Pride of India.
♦
Apple Inc.'s CEO Tim Cook defined the vision of the company as - "We
believe that we are on the face of the earth to make great products, and that's
not changing."
Essentials of a strategic vision
♦
The entrepreneurial challenge in developing a strategic vision is to think
creatively about how to prepare a company for the future.
♦
Forming a strategic vision is an exercise in intelligent entrepreneurship.
♦
A well-articulated strategic vision creates enthusiasm among the members of
the organisation.
♦
The best-worded vision statement clearly illuminates the direction in which
organisation is headed.

## 1.5.2 Mission
A mission is an answer to the basic question 'what business are we in and what we
do'. It has been observed that many firms fail to conceptualise and articulate the
mission and business definition with the required clarity. Such firms are seen to
fumble in the identification of opportunities and fail in formulating strategies to
make use of opportunities. Firms working to manage their organisation
strategically cannot be lax in the matter of mission and business definition, as the
two ideas are absolutely central to strategic planning.
[p17]
Why should an organisation have a mission?
♦
To ensure unanimity of purpose within the organisation.
♦
To develop a basis, or standard, for allocating organisational resources.
♦
To provide a basis for motivating the use of the organisation's resources.
♦
To establish a general tone or organisational climate, to suggest a businesslike operation.
♦
To serve as a focal point for those who can identify with the organisation's
purpose and direction.
♦
To facilitate the translation of objective and goals into a work structure
involving the assignment of tasks to responsible elements within the
organisation.
♦
To specify organisational purposes and the translation of these purposes into
goals in such a way that cost, time, and performance parameters can be
assessed and controlled.
A company's mission statement is typically focused on its present business scope
– "who we are and what we do". Mission statements broadly describe an
organisations present capability, customer focus, activities, and business makeup.
♦
HDCF Bank has two-fold mission: first, to be the preferred provider of
banking services for target retail and wholesale customer segments. The
second is to achieve healthy growth in profitability, consistent with the bank's
risk appetite.
♦
LIC Ltd.'s Mission is - Ensure and enhance the quality of life of people
through financial security by providing products and services of aspired
attributes with competitive returns, and by rendering resources for economic
development.
♦
Apple's mission has been defined as - "to bring the best user experience to
its customers through innovative hardware, software, and services."
Mission statement should reflect the philosophy of the organisations that is
perceived by the senior managers. A good mission statement should be precise,
clear, feasible, distinctive and motivating. Following points are useful while writing
a mission of a company:
[p18]
♦
One of the roles of a mission statement is to give the organisation its own
special identity, business emphasis and path for development – one that
typically sets it apart from other similarly positioned companies.
♦
A company's business is defined by what needs it is trying to satisfy, which
customer groups it is targeting and the technologies and competencies it
uses and the activities it performs.
♦
Good mission statements are – unique to the organisation for which they are
developed.
What is our mission? And what business are we in?
The well-known management experts, Peter Drucker and Theodore Levitt were
among the first to agitate this issue through their writings. They emphasised that
as the first step in the business planning endeavour, every business firm must clarify
the corporate mission and define accurately the business the firm is engaged in.
They also explained that towards facilitating this task, the firm should raise and
answer certain basic questions concerning its business, such as:
♦
What is our mission?
♦
What is our ultimate purpose?
♦
What do we want to become?
♦
What kind of growth do we seek?
♦
What business are we in?
♦
Do we understand our business correctly and define it accurately in its
broadest connotation?
♦
Whom do we intend to serve?
♦
What human need do we intend to serve through our offer?
♦
What brings us to this particular business?
♦
What would be the nature of this business in the future?
♦
In what business would we like to be in, in the future?
At the time these two experts raised this issue, the business managers of the world
did not fully appreciate the importance of these questions; those were the days
when business management was still a relatively simple process even in industrially
[p19]
advanced countries like the US. It was only in subsequent years that captains of
industry all over the world understood the significance of the seemingly simple
questions raised by Drucker and Levitt.
The corporate mission is an expression of the growth ambition of the firm. It is, in
fact, the firm's future visualised. It provides a dramatic picture of what the company
wants to become. It is the corporation's dream crystallised. It is a colourful sketch
of how the firm wants its future to look, irrespective of the current position. In other
words, the mission is a grand design of the firm's future.
Mission amplifies what brings the firm to this business or why it is there, what
existence it seeks and what purpose it seeks to achieve as a business firm. In other
words, the mission serves as a justification for the firm's very presence and
existence; it legitimises the firm's presence.
According to Peter Drucker, every organisation must ask an important question
"What business are we in?" and get the correct and meaningful answer. The answer
should have marketing or external perspective and should not be restated to the
production or generic activities of business. The table given below will clarify and
highlight the importance of external perspective.
What business are we in?
Company
Production-oriented answer
Marketing-oriented answer
Indian Oil
We produce oil and gasoline
products.
We provide various types of safe
and cost-effective energy.
Indian
Railways
We run a railroad.
We offer a transportation and
material-handling system.
Lakme
In
the
factory,
we
make
cosmetics.
In the retail outlet, we sell hope.

## 1.5.3 Goals and Objectives
Business organisation translates their vision and mission into goals and objectives.
As such the term objectives are synonymous with goals, however, some authors
make an attempt to distinguish the two. Goals are open-ended attributes that
denote the future states or outcomes. Objectives are close-ended attributes which
are precise and expressed in specific terms. Thus, the Objectives are more specific
[p20]
and translate the goals to both long term and short-term perspective. However,
this distinction is not made by several theorists on the subject. Accordingly, we will
also use the term interchangeably.
Objectives are organisation's performance targets – the results and outcomes it
wants to achieve. They function as yardsticks for tracking an organisation's
performance and progress.
HDFC can have multiple short term and long term objectives which align with the
overall vision and mission of the Bank.
All organisations have objectives. The pursuit of objectives is an unending process
such that organisations sustain themselves. They provide meaning and sense of
direction to organisational endeavour. Organisational structure and activities are
designed, and resources are allocated around the objectives to facilitate their
achievement. They also act as benchmarks for guiding organisational activity and
for evaluating how the organisation is performing.
Objectives with strategic focus relate to outcomes that strengthen an organisation's
overall business position and competitive vitality. Objectives, to be meaningful to
serve the intended role, must possess the following characteristics:
♦
Objectives should define the organisation's relationship with its environment.
♦
They should be facilitative towards achievement of mission and purpose.
♦
They should provide the basis for strategic decision-making.
♦
They should provide standards for performance appraisal.
♦
They should be concrete and specific.
♦
They should be related to a time frame.
♦
They should be measurable and controllable.
♦
They should be challenging.
♦
Different objectives should correlate with each other.
♦
Objectives should be set within the constraints of organisational resources
and external environment.
[p21]
A need for both short-term and long-term objectives: As a rule, a company's set of
financial and strategic objectives ought to include both short-term and long-term
performance targets. Having quarterly or annual objectives focuses attention on
delivering immediate performance improvements. Targets to be achieved within
three to five years' prompt considerations of what to do now to put the company
in position to perform better down the road. A company that has an objective of
doubling its sales within five years can't wait until the third or fourth year to begin
growing its sales and customer base. By spelling out annual (or perhaps quarterly)
performance targets, management indicates the speed at which longer-range
targets are to be approached.
Long-term objectives: To achieve long-term prosperity, strategic planners
commonly establish long-term objectives in seven areas.
♦
Profitability
♦
Productivity
♦
Competitive Position
♦
Employee Development
♦
Employee Relations
♦
Technological Leadership
♦
Public Responsibility
Long-term objectives represent the results expected from pursuing certain
strategies. Strategies represent the actions to be taken to accomplish long-term
objectives. The time frame for objectives and strategies should be consistent,
usually from two to five years.
Short-range objectives can be identical to long-range objectives if an organisation
is already performing at the targeted long-term level. For instance, if a company
has an ongoing objective of 15 percent profit growth every year and is currently
achieving this objective, then the company's long-range and short-range objectives
for increasing profits coincide. The most important situation in which short-range
objectives differ from long-range objectives occurs when managers are trying to
elevate organisational performance and cannot reach the long-range target in just
one year. Short-range objectives then serve as steps toward achieving long term
objectives.
[p22]
Clearly established objectives offer many benefits. They provide direction, allow
synergy, aid in evaluation, establish priorities, reduce uncertainty, minimize
conflicts, stimulate exertion, and aid in both the allocation of resources and the
design of jobs.

## 1.5.4 VALUES
"Business, as I have seen it, places one great demand on you: it needs you to selfimpose a framework of ethics, values, fairness and objectivity on yourself at all
times." - Ratan N Tata, 2006 (Source: TATA Group Website)
A few common examples of values are – Integrity, Trust, Accountability,
Humility, Innovation, and Diversity. But why are values so important? A
company's value sets the tone for how the people of think and behave, especially
in situations of dilemma. It creates a sense of shared purpose to build a strong
foundation and focus on longevity of the company's success. Employees prefer to
work with employers whose values resonate with them - the ones they can relate
to in their daily work and personal life. Interestingly, majority of consumers say that
they would prefer to buy products and services from companies that have a
purpose that reflects their own value and belief system. Hence, values have both
internal as well as external implications.
For reference, a lot of values were put to actions during Covid 19 pandemic when
leaders of the organisations put people before everything else. It projected how
deep the foundation of the organisations' were and how important it was for them
to uphold their core values.
VALUES
Intent,
Vision,
Mission;
Goals &
Objectives
[p23]
The above graphic represents the interconnection of Intent, Vision, Mission, Goals
and Values; Values remain the center/core of Vision, Mission, Goals and putting all
them to action. Vision is followed by Mission, followed by Goals and finally
executing via real actions.
Values of HDFC Bank
HDFC Bank is committed to maintaining the highest level of ethical standards,
professional integrity, corporate governance and regulatory compliance. HDFC
Bank's business philosophy is based on five core values: Operational Excellence,
Customer Focus, Product Leadership, People and Sustainability. (Source: HDFC
website)
Can you now go and read about LIC and Apple's values? Try on your own.
Intent vs Values - Which is a broader concept?
Sandeep, a human resource manager thinks that Intent is a bigger concept than
Values. Is he right?
Sandeep is not right, as Values and Intent are two different concepts. Intent is
the purpose of doing business while values are the principles that guide decision
making of business. They both go hand in hand, while the intent is sometimes
driven by values. So values more or so is wider than Intent.

## 1.6 STRATEGIC LEVELS IN ORGANISATIONS
A typical large organization is a multi-divisional organisation that competes in
several different businesses. It has separate self-contained divisions to manage
each of these businesses. For example, Patanjali has healthcare, FMCG, Organic
Foods, Medicinal Oils and Herbs, and various different businesses. It has separate
divisions which work within themselves to sustain each of these businesses.
[p24]
Generally, there are three main levels of management:
♦
Corporate level
♦
Business level
♦
Functional level
General managers are found at the first two of these levels, but their strategic roles
differ depending on their sphere of responsibility.
Figure: Levels of strategic management
An organization is divided into a number of segments that work together to bring
a particular product or service to the market. If a company provides several and/or
different kinds of products or services, it often duplicates these functions and
creates a series of self-contained divisions (each of which contain its own set of
functions) to manage each different product or service. The general managers of
these divisions then become responsible for their particular product line. The
overriding concern of the divisional managers is healthy growth of their divisions.
They are responsible for deciding how to create a competitive advantage and
achieve higher profitability with the resources and capital they have at their
disposal. Such divisions are called Strategic Business Units (SBUs).
The corporate level of management consists of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO),
other senior executives, the board of directors, and corporate staff. These
individuals participate in strategic decision making within the organization. The role
of corporate-level managers is to oversee the development of strategies for the
whole organization. This role includes defining the mission and goals of the
organization, determining what businesses it should be in, allocating resources
FUNCTIONAL LEVEL
Functional managers (marketing,
finance, etc....)
BUSINESS LEVEL
Divisional managers & staff
CORPORATE LEVEL
CEO, other senior executives, Board
of directors, and Corporate staff
HEAD OFFICE
DIVISION A
BUSINESS
FUNCTION
DIVISION B
BUSINESS
FUNCTION
DIVISION C
BUSINESS
FUNCTION
[p25]
among the different businesses, formulating and implementing strategies that span
individual businesses, and providing leadership for the organization as a whole.
For example, Ahmedabad headquartered Adani Group is an Indian multinational
conglomerate active in a wide range of businesses, including mining, operating
ports and airports, power generation and transmission and cement. The main
strategic responsibilities of its Group Chairman, Mr. Gautam Adani, are setting
overall strategic objectives, allocating resources among the different business
areas, deciding whether the firm should divest itself of any of its businesses, and
determining whether it should acquire any new ones. In other words, it is up to Mr.
Adani and other senior executives to develop strategies that span individual
businesses and building and managing the corporate portfolio of businesses to
maximize corporate profitability. However, it is not their specific responsibility to
develop strategies for competing in the individual business areas, such as financial
services. The development of such strategies is the responsibility of those in charge
of different businesses called business level managers.
In simple words, corporate level managers provide an organisation level view of
strategy and what they want to achieve, but it is on the business level managers to
ensure that or their particular business, the one they are responsible for.
Besides overseeing resource allocation and managing the divestment and
acquisition processes, corporate-level managers provide a link between the people
who oversee the strategic development of a firm and those who own it (the
shareholders). Corporate-level managers, and particularly the CEO, can be viewed
as the guardians of shareholders' welfare. It is their responsibility to ensure that the
corporate and business strategies of the company are consistent with maximizing
shareholders' wealth. If they are not, then ultimately the CEO is likely to be held
accountable by the shareholders.
As we now know, a strategic business unit is a self-contained division (with its own
functions - For example, finance, purchasing, production, and marketing
departments) that provides a product or service for a particular market. The principal
general manager at the business level, or the business-level manager, is the head
of the division. The strategic role of these managers is to translate the general
statements of direction and intent that come from the corporate level into concrete
strategies for individual businesses. Thus, whereas corporate-level managers are
[p26]
concerned with strategies that span individual businesses, business-level managers
are concerned with strategies that are specific to a particular business.
Functional-level managers are responsible for the specific business functions or
operations (human resources, purchasing, product development, customer service,
and so on) that constitute a company or one of its divisions. Thus, a functional
manager's sphere of responsibility is generally confined to one organizational
activity, whereas general managers oversee the operation of a whole company or
division. Although they are not responsible for the overall performance of the
organization, functional managers nevertheless have a major strategic role: to
develop functional strategies in their area that help fulfill the strategic objectives
set by business- and corporate-level general managers.
Functional managers provide most of the information that makes it possible for
business- and corporate-level general managers to formulate realistic and
attainable strategies. Indeed, because they are closer to the customer than the
typical general manager is, functional managers themselves may generate
important ideas that subsequently may become major strategies for the company.
Thus, it is important for general managers to listen closely to the ideas of their
functional managers. An equally great responsibility for managers at the
operational level is strategy implementation: the execution of corporate and
business-level plans.
Headquarter
Corporate Strategy
Where to compete ?
SBU 1 Business
Strategy
How to  compete ?
Business Function 1
Functional Strategy
Strategy
How to implement
business strategy ?
Business Function 2
Functional Strategy
Strategy
How to implement
business strategy ?
Business Function 3
Functional Strategy
Strategy
How to implement
business strategy ?
Business Function 4
Functional Strategy
Strategy
How to implement
business strategy ?
SBU 2 Business
Strategy
How to  compete ?
SBU 3 Business
Strategy
How to  compete ?
[p27]
Which is better - Top Down Approach or Bottom-Up Approach?
Do you know the concepts of Top-Down and Bottom-Up approach of decision
making?
A top-down approach to decision making is when decisions are made solely by
leadership at the top i.e. corporate level of management, while the bottom-up
approach gives all teams across the levels a voice in decision making.

## 1.6.1  Network of relationship between the three levels
The corporate level decides what the business wants to achieve, while the business
level draws ideas and plan to execute the same, which eventually flow down to
functional level to execute and achieve results. But there are multiple ways in which
all the 3 levels of management are interlinked, and interestingly it depends on the
organisation as a whole to decide what kind of network of relationship suits their
culture and aspirations.
There are 3 major types of networks of relationship between the levels and also
amongst the same levels of a business;
♦
Functional and Divisional Relationship: It is an independent relationship,
where each function or a division is run independently headed by the
function/division head, who is a business level manager, reporting directly to the
business head, who is a business level manager. Functions maybe like Finance,
Human Resources, Marketing, etc. while Divisions may depend on the products
like for a toys manufacturer - kids toys, teenager toys, etc. could be divisions.
♦
Horizontal Relationship: All positions, from top management to staff-level
employees, are in the same hierarchical position. It is a flat structure where
everyone is considered at same level. This leads to openness and
transparency in work culture and focused more on idea sharing and
innovation. This type of relationship between levels is more suitable for
startups where the need to share ideas with speed is more desirable.
♦
Matrix Relationship: It features a grid-like structure of levels in an
organisation, with teams formed with people from various departments that
are built for temporary task-based projects. This relationship helps manage
huge conglomerates with ease where it is nearly impossible to track and
[p28]
manage every single team independently. In Matrix relationship - there are
more than one business level managers for each functional level teams. It is
complex for smaller organisations, but extremely useful for large
organisations.
SUMMARY
All firms have a strategy, even if it is informal, unstructured, and sporadic. All
organizations are heading somewhere, but unfortunately some organizations do
not know where they are going. Increased competition and agile business
landscape accents the need for organizations to use strategic-management
concepts and techniques. The strategic-management process is becoming more
widely used by small firms, large companies, nonprofit institutions, governmental
organizations, and multinational conglomerates alike. The process of empowering
managers and employees has almost limitless benefits. A strategy consists of the
combination of competitive moves and business approaches that managers employ
to please customer, compete successfully and achieve organizational objectives.
This chapter elucidated business policy as a discipline and its transformation to
strategic management. It presented a framework for understanding strategic
decision making.
The three strategic levels in an organization were discussed: Corporate Level,
Business Level and Operational/Functional Level. We further discussed how these
managers formulate and implement strategies at their respective levels.
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Multiple Choice Questions

## 1 Strategy is a game plan used for which of the following?
(a)
To take market position
(b)
To attract and satisfy customers
(c)
To respond to dynamic and hostile environment
(d)
All of the above
[p29]

## 2 Which of the following is correct?
(a)
Strategy is always pragmatic and not flexible
(b)
Strategy is not always perfect, flawless and optimal
(c)
Strategy is always perfect, flawless and optimal
(d)
Strategy is always flexible but not pragmatic

## 3. Strategy is(a)
Proactive in action
(b)
Reactive in action
(c)
A blend of proactive and reactive actions
(d)
None of the above

## 4. Reactive strategy can also be termed as(a)
Planned strategy
(b)
Adaptive strategy
(c)
Sound strategy
(d)
Dynamic strategy

## 5. Formulation of strategies in a strategic management process is undertaken by?
(a)
Top Level Executives
(b)
Middle Level Executives
(c)
Lower Level Executives
(d)
All of the above

## 6. Which of the following are responsible for breaking down the strategy into
actionable tasks and executing them to achieve overall strategy?
(a)
Corporate Level and Business Level Managers
(b)
Corporate Level and Functional Level Managers
(c)
Business Level and Functional Level Managers
(d)
Corporate Level, Business Level Managers and Functional Level Managers
[p30]

## 7. Which of the following manager's roles is to be as close to the customer &
consumer as possible to ensure the strategies being made are realistic and
attainable?
(a)
Supervisors of the Team
(b)
Functional Manager
(c)
Chief Executive Officer
(d)
Strategic Business Unit Head

## 8. Which statement should be created first and foremost?
(a)
Strategy
(b)
Vision
(c)
Objectives
(d)
Mission

## 9. Strategic management enables an organization to __________, instead of
companies just responding to threats in their business environment.
(a)
be proactive
(b)
determine when the threat will subside
(c)
avoid the threats
(d)
defeat their competitors

## 10. Read the following three statements
(i)
Strategies are for short term quick results
(ii)
Strategies are action oriented

## (iii)  Strategies are fluid and flexible
Select the combination of statements that is true;
(a)
i and ii
(b)
ii and iii
(c)
i and iii
(d)
i, ii and iii
[p31]

## 11. What involves formulating, implementing, and evaluating cross-functional
decisions that enable an organization to achieve its objectives?
(a)
Strategy formulation
(b)
Strategy evaluation
(c)
Strategy implementation
(d)

## 12 Strategic management allows an organization to be more
(a)
Authoritative
(b)
Participative
(c)
Commanding
(d)
Proactive
Scenario Based Questions
1. Swati is the marketing manager at a software company. She is responsible for
developing and implementing marketing strategies for the company's products.
Swati leads a team of marketing professionals and works closely with the
product development and sales teams to ensure that the company's products
are effectively promoted in the market. She also analyzes market trends and
customer feedback to refine the marketing strategies. Which level is she working
at, discuss the roles and responsibilities of this level in organization?
2. ABC retail chain regularly monitors consumer trends and supply chain flexibility.
The retail chain tracks consumer trends to adjust its offerings, ensuring they
meet customer needs. Simultaneously, it maintains a flexible supply chain to
respond swiftly to demand fluctuations. This strategy enables ABC retail chain
to anticipate market shifts and adapt to them effectively, ensuring its
competitiveness and customer satisfaction. Which type of strategy is the retail
chain employing?

## 3. ABC Pharmaceuticals, a leading pharmaceutical company, is in the process of
formulating its strategic intent. The top management of ABC Pharmaceuticals
wants to define the company's future direction, objectives, and goals. Their aim
is to create a vision that sets the organization apart and provides a roadmap for
[p32]
future growth. ABC Pharmaceuticals aspires to enrich the lives of people by
producing high-quality pharmaceutical products at competitive prices and
wants to become the world's leading pharmaceutical company by 2030." Based
on this context, draft a vision and mission statement that could be formulated
by the top management of ABC Pharmaceuticals.

## 4. Imagine you are a strategic consultant advising a retail company that is facing
increasing competition from online retailers. The company is considering several
strategic options to improve its market position. Using the concept that strategy
is partly proactive and partly reactive, explain how the company can develop a
strategic approach to address this challenge.
5. Tech Innovators Inc., a rapidly expanding technology company, aims to lead in
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML). With recent growth, the
company is evaluating which organizational structure will best support its vision
for innovation and leadership in AI technologies. They are considering three
options: the Functional and Divisional Relationship for specialization, the
Horizontal Relationship for flat, collaborative management, and the Matrix
Relationship for cross-functional teams. Which of these relationships—
Functional and Divisional, Horizontal, or Matrix—will most effectively achieve
Tech Innovators Inc.'s strategic goals, and why?
6. Mr. Raj has been hired as a CEO by XYZ ltd a FMCG company that has diversified
into affordable cosmetics. The company intends to launch Feelgood brand of
cosmetics. XYZ wishes to enrich the lives of people with its products that are
good for skin and are produced in ecologically beneficial manner using herbal
ingredients. Draft vision and mission statement that may be formulated by Raj.

## 7. Yummy Foods and Tasty Foods are successfully competing in the business of
ready to eat snacks in Patna. Yummy has been pioneer in introducing innovative
products. These products will give them good sale. However, Tasty Foods will
introduce similar products in reaction to the products introduced by the Yummy
Foods taking away the advantage gained by the former.
Discuss the strategic approach of the two companies. Which is superior?
8. Ramesh Sharma has fifteen stores selling consumer durables in Delhi Region.
Four of these stores were opened in last three years. He believes in managing
strategically and enjoyed significant sales of refrigerator, televisions, washing
[p33]
machines, air conditioners and like till four years back. With shift to the
purchases to online stores, the sales of his stores came down to about seventy
per cent in last four years.
Analyse the position of Ramesh Sharma in light of limitations of strategic
management.

## 9. Dharam Singh, the procurement department head of Cyclix, a mountain biking
equipment company, was recently promoted to look after sales department
along with procurement department. His seniors at the corporate level have
always liked his way of leadership and are assured that he would ensure the
implementation of policies and strategies to the best of his capacity but have
never involved him in decision making for the company.
Do you think this is the right approach? Validate your answer with logical
reasoning around management levels and decision making.

## 10. ABC Limited is in a wide range of businesses which include apparels, lifestyle
products, furniture, real estate and electrical products. The company is looking
to hire a suitable Chief Executive Officer. Consider yourself as the HR consultant
for ABC limited. You have been assigned the task to enlist the activities involved
with the role of the Chief Executive Officer. Name the strategic level that this
role belongs to and enlist the activities associated with it.
Descriptive Questions

## 1. What is Strategic Management? What benefits accrue by following a strategic
approach to managing?

## 2. Are there any limitations attached to strategic management in organizations?
Discuss.
3. Explain the difference between three levels of strategy formulation.
4.
"Strategy is partly proactive and partly reactive." Discuss.
[p34]
ANSWERS/SOLUTIONS
Answers to Multiple Choice Questions
1
(d)
2
(b)
3
(c)
4
(b)
5
(a)
6
(c)
7
(b)
8
(b)
9
(a)
10
(b)
11
(d)
12
(d)
Answers to Scenario Based Questions

## 1. Swati operates at the functional level of management, specifically as the
marketing manager at a software company. Functional managers like Swati
oversee specific departments or functions within an organization, such as
marketing, finance, or operations. Their primary responsibilities include
implementing corporate strategies and policies within their area of expertise
and ensuring that daily operations are conducted efficiently and effectively.
In Swati's case, as a marketing manager, her role involves developing and
executing marketing strategies for the company's products. This includes
leading a team of marketing professionals, collaborating with product
development and sales teams, and analyzing market trends and customer
feedback to refine strategies. By working closely with these teams, Swati
ensures that the company's products are effectively promoted in the market
and that marketing efforts align with overall business goals.
Functional managers like Swati play a critical role in the organization by
bridging the gap between corporate strategy and daily operations. They are
responsible for translating high-level strategic goals into actionable plans for
their departments and ensuring that these plans are executed effectively.
Additionally, they are often key decision-makers within their areas of
responsibility, making strategic choices that impact on the company's success.
Overall, Swati's role as a marketing manager exemplifies the importance of
functional managers in driving the success of their organizations.

## 2. The retail chain is employing a strategy that combines both proactive and
reactive elements. Monitoring consumer trends and adjusting product
offerings accordingly demonstrates a proactive approach to anticipate and
meet customer needs. On the other hand, maintaining a flexible supply chain
[p35]
to respond quickly to changes in demand reflects a reactive strategy to
address unforeseen shifts in the market.
This combination allows the retail chain to both anticipate future trends and
react effectively to immediate market changes, making its strategy partly
proactive and partly reactive. This dual strategy of proactive trend monitoring
and reactive supply chain flexibility enables the retail chain to anticipate
market shifts and adapt to them effectively, ensuring its competitiveness and
customer satisfaction.

## 3. ABC Pharmaceuticals may have following vision and mission:
Vision: Vision implies the blueprint of the company's future position. It
describes where the organisation wants to land. ABC Pharmaceuticals may
have vision "To be the globally recognized leader in pharmaceutical
innovation and enriching the lives of people worldwide by providing highquality, affordable, and accessible pharmaceutical products."
Mission:  Mission delineates the firm's business, its goals and ways to reach
the goals. It explains the reason for the existence of the firm in society. It is
designed to help potential shareholders and investors understand the purpose
of the company.
ABC Pharmaceuticals may identify mission in the following lines:
•
To improve the well-being of individuals and communities by
relentlessly
pursuing
excellence
in
pharmaceutical
research,
development, and manufacturing.
•
Committed to producing safe, effective, and sustainable medicines that
address unmet medical needs and enhance the quality of life for
patients.
•
Through innovation, collaboration, and ethical practices, we aim to make
a positive impact on global healthcare and become the trusted partner
of healthcare providers and patients alike.

## 4. The retail company can develop a strategic approach that is both proactive
and reactive to address the challenge of increasing competition from online
retailers. To achieve this, the company can:
[p36]
♦
Proactive Strategy: The company can proactively analyze market
trends and customer preferences to identify opportunities for growth.
For example, it can invest in market research to understand what
customers value in a retail experience and tailor its offerings to meet
those needs. This proactive approach can help the company stay ahead
of competitors and attract new customers.
♦
Reactive Strategy: In addition to proactive measures, the company
should also be prepared to react to changes in the market environment.
For example, if a competitor launches a new online shopping platform,
the company should quickly assess the impact on its business and
develop a response. This reactive strategy can help the company adapt
to changing market conditions and maintain its competitiveness.
By combining proactive and reactive strategies, the retail company can
develop a comprehensive approach to addressing the challenge of increasing
competition from online retailers. This approach will allow the company to
capitalize on opportunities for growth while also mitigating risks and
responding to threats in the market.
5. The Matrix Relationship is the most effective structure for Tech Innovators Inc.
to achieve its vision of leadership in AI technologies. This structure promotes
cross-functional collaboration, essential for managing complex AI projects and
fostering innovation. By integrating expertise from various departments into
temporary, task-based teams, the Matrix Relationship supports dynamic
project management and aligns well with the company's strategic goals for
advancing AI technologies. Despite its complexity, this approach provides the
flexibility and collaboration necessary for a leading-edge AI and ML focus.
Relationship
Benefits
Drawbacks
Suitability for AI
Leadership
Functional
and
Divisional
Specialization, clear
management
of
functions
and
products.
Potential
for
departmental
isolation, limited
collaboration.
Less effective for
cross-functional AI
projects.
Horizontal
Open
communication,
encourages
Hard
to
scale,
unclear roles and
responsibilities.
Suitable
for
startups, less for
large AI initiatives.
[p37]
innovation and fast
idea sharing.
Matrix
Facilitates
crossfunctional
collaboration,
flexible
resource
management
for
complex projects.
Complex
reporting
structures,
potential
conflicts.
Ideal for managing
diverse, innovative
AI projects.

## 6. Feelgood brand of cosmetics may have following vision and mission:
Vision: Vision implies the blueprint of the company's future position. It
describes where the organisation wants to land. Mr. Raj should aim to position
"Feelgood cosmetics" as India's beauty care company. It may have vision to
be India' largest beauty care company that improves looks, give extraordinary
feeling and bring happiness to people.
Mission: Mission delineates the firm's business, its goals and ways to reach
the goals. It explains the reason for the existence of the firm in the society. It
is designed to help potential shareholders and investors understand the
purpose of the company:
Mr. Raj may identify mission in the following lines:
♦
To be in the business of cosmetics to enhance the lives of people, give
them confidence to lead.
♦
To protect skin from harmful elements in environment and sun rays.
♦
To produce herbal cosmetics using natural ingredients.
7. Yummy foods is proactive in its approach. On the other hand, Tasty Food is
reactive. A proactive strategy is a planned strategy whereas reactive strategy
is an adaptive reaction to changing circumstances. A company's strategy is
typically a blend of proactive actions on the part of managers to improve the
company's market position and financial performance and reactions to
unanticipated developments and fresh market conditions.
If organisational resources permit, it is better to be proactive rather than
reactive. Being proactive in aspects such as introducing new products will give
you an advantage in the mind of customers.
[p38]
At the same time, crafting a strategy involves stitching together a
proactive/intended strategy and then adapting first one piece and then
another as circumstances surrounding the company's situation change or
better options emerge-a reactive/adaptive strategy. This aspect can be
accomplished by Yummy Foods.

## 8. Ramesh Sharma is facing declining sales on account of large-scale shift of
customers to online stores. While he is using the tools of strategic
management, they cannot counter all hindrances and always achieve success.
There are limitations attached to strategic management as follows:
♦
Environment under which strategies are made is highly complex and
turbulent. Entry of online stores, a new kind of competitor brought a
different dimension to selling consumer durables. Online stores with
their size power could control the market and offer stiff competition to
traditional stores.
♦
Another limitation of strategic management is that it is difficult to
predict how things will shape-up in future. Ramesh Sharma, although
managing strategically failed to see how online stores will impact the
sales.
♦
Although, strategic management is a time-consuming process, he
should continue to manage strategically. The challenging times require
more efforts on his part.
♦
Strategic management is costly. Ramesh Sharma may consider
engaging experts to find out preferences of the customers and attune
his strategies to better serve them in a customized manner. Such
customized offerings may be difficult to match by the online stores.
♦
The stores owned by Ramesh Sharma are much smaller than online
stores. It is very difficult for him to visualize how online stores will be
moving strategically.

## 9. Functional managers provide most of the information that makes it possible
for business and corporate level managers to formulate realistic and attainable
strategies.
This is so because functional managers like Dharam Singh are closer to the
customers/suppliers/ operations than the typical general manager is. A
[p39]
functional manager may generate important ideas that subsequently may
become major strategies for the company. Thus, it is important for general
managers to listen closely to the ideas of their functional managers and
involve them in decision making.
An equally great responsibility for managers at the operational level is strategy
implementation: the execution of corporate and business level plans, and if
they are involved in formulation, the clarity of thoughts while implementation
can benefit too.
Thus, the approach of Cyclix Corporate management is not right. They should
involve Dharam Singh, as well as other functional managers too in strategic
management.
10. The role of Chief Executive Officer pertains to corporate level.
The corporate level of management consists of the Chief Executive Officer
(CEO) and other top-level executives. These individuals occupy the apex of
decision making within the organization.
The role of Chief Executive Officer (Top Management/Corporate Level
Managers) is to:
1.
oversee the development of strategies for the whole organization;
2.
defining the mission and goals of the organization;
3.
determining what businesses it should be in;
4.
allocating resources among the different businesses;
5.
formulating, and implementing strategies that span individual
businesses;
6.
providing leadership for the organization;
7.
ensuring that the corporate and business level strategies which company
pursues are consistent with maximizing shareholders wealth; and
8.
managing the divestment and acquisition process.
Answer to Descriptive Questions

## 1. The term 'strategic management' refers to the managerial process of
developing a strategic vision, setting objectives, crafting a strategy,
[p40]
implementing and evaluating the strategy, and initiating corrective
adjustments were deemed appropriate.
The overall objective of strategic management is two-fold:
♦
To create competitive advantage, so that the company can outperform
the competitors in order to have dominance over the market.
♦
To guide the company successfully through all changes in the
environment.
The following are the benefits of strategic approach to managing:
♦
Strategic management helps organisations to be more proactive
instead of reactive in shaping its future. Organisations are able to
analyse and take actions instead of being mere spectators. Thereby they
are able to control their own destiny in a better manner. It helps them
in working within vagaries of environment and shaping it, instead of
getting carried away by its turbulence or uncertainties.
♦
Strategic management provides frameworks for all the major decisions
of an enterprise such as decisions on businesses, products, markets,
manufacturing facilities, investments and organisational structure. It
provides better guidance to entire organisation on the crucial point -
what it is trying to do.
♦
Strategic management is concerned with ensuring a good future for the
firm. It seeks to prepare the corporation to face the future and act as
pathfinder to various business opportunities. Organisations are able to
identify the available opportunities and identify ways and means as how
to reach them.
♦
Strategic management serves as a corporate defence mechanism
against mistakes and pitfalls. It helps organisations to avoid costly
mistakes in product market choices or investments. Over a period of
time strategic management helps organisation to evolve certain core
competencies and competitive advantages that assist in its fight for
survival and growth.
[p41]

## 2. The presence of strategic management cannot counter all hindrances and
always achieve success. There are limitations attached to strategic
management. These can be explained in the following lines:
♦
Environment is highly complex and turbulent. It is difficult to
understand the complex environment and exactly pinpoint how it will
shape-up in future. The organisational estimate about its future shape
may awfully go wrong and jeopardise all strategic plans.
♦
Strategic management is a time-consuming process. Organisations
spend a lot of time in preparing, communicating the strategies that may
impede daily operations and negatively impact the routine business.
♦
Strategic management is a costly process. Strategic management adds
a lot of expenses to an organization. Expert strategic planners need to
be engaged, efforts are made for analysis of external and internal
environments devise strategies and properly implement. These can be
really costly for organisations with limited resources.
♦
In a competitive scenario, where all organisations are trying to move
strategically, it is difficult to clearly estimate the competitive responses
to a firm's strategies.

## 3. A typical large organization is a multidivisional organisation that competes in
several different businesses. It has separate self-contained divisions to
manage each of these. There are three levels of strategy in management of
business - corporate, business, and functional.
The corporate level of management consists of the chief executive officer and
other top-level executives. These individuals occupy the apex of decision
making within the organization. The role of corporate-level managers is to
oversee the development of strategies for the whole organization. This role
includes defining the mission and goals of the organization, determining what
businesses it should be in, allocating resources among the different businesses
and so on rests at the Corporate Level.
The development of strategies for individual business areas is the
responsibility of the general managers in these different businesses or
business level managers. A business unit is a self-contained division with its
own functions - For example, finance, production, and marketing. The
[p42]
strategic role of business-level manager, head of the division, is to translate
the general statements of direction and intent that come from the corporate
level into concrete strategies for individual businesses.
Functional-level managers are responsible for the specific business functions
or operations such as human resources, purchasing, product development,
customer service, and so on. Thus, a functional manager's sphere of
responsibility is generally confined to one organizational activity, whereas
general managers oversee the operation of a whole company or division.
4. Strategy is partly proactive and partly reactive. In proactive strategy,
organizations will analyze possible environmental scenarios and create
strategic framework after proper planning and set procedures and work on
these strategies in a predetermined manner. However, in reality no company
can forecast both internal and external environment exactly. Everything cannot
be planned in advance. It is not possible to anticipate moves of rival firms,
consumer behaviour, evolving technologies and so on.
There can be significant deviations between what was visualized and what
actually happens. Strategies need to be attuned or modified in the light of
possible environmental changes. There can be significant or major strategic
changes when the environment demands. Reactive strategy is triggered by the
changes in the environment and provides ways and means to cope with the
negative factors or take advantage of emerging opportunities.