<<PAGE 1>>
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 
3 
 
 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
  
 
STRATEGIC 
ANALYSIS: INTERNAL 
ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
After studying this chapter, you will be able to: 
♦ 
Understand the importance of the internal environment in 
strategic analysis.  
♦ 
Explain the stakeholder view of the firm. 
♦ 
Identify and explain the strategic drivers. 
♦ 
Examine the role of firm-level resources and competencies in 
shaping the strategic advantage of the firm. 
♦ 
Integrate analyses of internal and external environments into 
SWOT and formulation of business level strategies.  
  
 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 2>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.2 
 
 
 
3.1 
INTRODUCTION 
Strategic Analysis is equally important when it comes to internal environment 
assessment. 
Internal environment refers to the sum total of people – individuals and groups, 
stakeholders, processes- input-throughput-output, physical infrastructure- space, 
equipment and physical conditions of work, administrative apparatus- lines of 
authority & power, responsibility, accountability and organizational culture- 
intangible aspects of working- relationships, philosophy, values, ethics- that shape 
an organization’s identity.     
Strategic Analysis of Internal 
Environment
Key Stakeholders
Mendelow's 
Matrix
Strategic Drivers
Industry & 
Markets
Customers
Product/Services
Channels
Core Competency
SWOT Analysis
Porter's Generic 
Strategies
Cost Leadership
Differentiation
Focussed
CHAPTER OVERVIEW 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 3>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.3 
In other words, the internal environment is specific to each organisation. It is based 
on its structure and business model and includes all stakeholders like top 
management, investors, employees, board of directors, investors, etc. 
Internal environment also involves understanding of the ethics, principles, work 
environment, employee friendliness, confidence of investors and other 
philosophical and cultural aspects of business, which aim for the success of the 
organisation. 
Thus, it is even more important to understand the internal environment from a 
strategic analysis perspective.  
3.2 
UNDERSTANDING KEY STAKEHOLDERS 
Who are Stakeholders and how do we identify them? 
A firm may be viewed as a coalition of stakeholders- all those individuals and 
entities that have a stake in its success and can impact it as well. They may be the 
employees, shareholders, investors, suppliers, customers, regulators and so on. This 
view of the firm is in contrast to the earlier view of the firm that was considered to 
be an extension of the owners and shareholders alone.  
Thus, it may be reiterated that the stakeholders can be defined as any person/group 
of individuals, internal or external, that has an interest in, or impact on the business 
or corporate strategy of the organisation. They have the power to influence the 
strategy or performance of that organisation. 
Generally, stakeholders include management, employees, shareholders, customers 
and vendors. Additionally, other individuals and groups, such as governments, 
labour unions and local groups, which are often considered as stakeholders 
depending on their impact on the particular organisation. Each stakeholder or 
stakeholder group will be affected by the business strategy that the organisation 
chooses and implements. 
It is important to first identify the key stakeholders. Each stakeholder exerts a 
different level of influence and can have differing levels of interest in the 
organisation. For example, an organisation involved in healthcare innovation 
needs to have a long-term perspective about its return on investment (ROI) as there 
may be a long time between investment into research timelines and a commercial 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 4>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.4 
outcome. While, shareholders, whose main concern is quick profits, may be more 
hesitant to support the organisation spending funds on something that they may 
not see the return in the near future.  
Since the expectations of key stakeholders can influence the organisation’s 
strategy, a clash of objectives may have unfavourable consequences for the 
organisation. 
Example of Key Stakeholders and their requirements for an OTT Platform 
Stakeholders 
Requirements 
Shareholders 
♦ Innovation and continuous creative 
content 
♦ Total shareholder return (RoI) 
♦ Corporate social responsibility 
♦ Top rankings of the organisation 
♦ Highest market share  
CEO and Board of Directors 
♦ Prestige 
♦ Market share 
♦ Revenue and profit growth  
♦ Market rankings 
Major Vendors (Production Houses) 
♦ Growth 
♦ Stability of ordering  
♦ Stable margins 
Consumers (Viewers) 
♦ New content - Innovation 
♦ Better deals - Pricing Benefits 
♦ Value for money 
♦ Continuous supply 
Employees 
♦ Wages and benefits 
♦ Stability of employment 
♦ Pride of working for a reputed 
organisation 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 5>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.5 
3.2.1 Mendelow’s Matrix 
The Mendelow Stakeholder matrix (also known as the Stakeholder Analysis matrix 
and the Power-Interest matrix) is a simple framework to help manage key 
stakeholders.  
Managing a project is extremely complicated as it involves managing the 
competing interests of various stakeholders. Who needs to know what and when, 
who needs to give their feedback and who has the final approval can be confusing. 
However, managing stakeholders is critical to the success of a project. This is where 
a stakeholder analysis matrix i.e. Mendelow’s Matrix can help. 
Mendelow suggests that one should analyse stakeholder groups based on Power 
(the ability to influence organisation strategy or resources) and Interest (how 
interested they are in the organisation succeeding). A thing to remember is that all 
stakeholders may seem to have lots of power and organisation may hope they 
would have lots of interest too. But in reality, some stakeholders will hold more 
Power than others, and some stakeholders will have more Interest than others. For 
example, a big shareholder is likely to have high power and high interest in the 
organisation, whereas a big competitor would have high power to impact strategy, 
but potentially less Interest in success of rival organisation. 
Developing a Grid of Stakeholders 
Mendelow’s Matrix is based on Power and Interest. It suggests identifying which 
stakeholders are incredibly important. Metrics to define the importance being High 
Power and High Interest which management would need to manage closely, while 
investing a lot of time and resources.   
For example, the CEO is likely to have more Power to influence the work and also 
high interest in it being successful. Keeping them informed almost daily should be 
a priority.   
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 6>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.6 
However, those stakeholders with low power and low interest like research 
institutes seeking an organisation data should be monitored rarely and minimum 
effort expended on them in terms of time and money.  
In the above figure, we see categorisation of stakeholders into four groups by 
Mendelow’s; 
♦ 
KEEP SATISFIED Stakeholders: High power, less interested people - 
Organisation should put in enough work with these people to keep them 
satisfied with their intended information on a regular basis. For example, 
banks, government, customers, etc. 
♦ 
KEY PLAYERS Stakeholders: High power, highly interested people - 
Organisation’s aim should be to fully engage this group of stakeholders, 
making the greatest efforts to satisfy them, take their advice, build actions 
and keep them informed with all information on a regular basis. For example, 
Shareholders, CEO, Board of Directors, etc. 
 
KEEP SATISFIED 
Consult often  
Increase their interest 
Can be hindrance to new 
ideas or strategic choices 
KEY PLAYER 
Manage Closely  
Involve in decision making 
Engage regularly and build 
strong relationship 
LOW PRIORITY 
Monitor only,  
no engagement 
General occasional 
communication 
KEEP INFORMED 
Utilise the high interest by 
engaging in decisions 
Consult in their areas of 
expertise and interest 
Interest in the Organisation 
Power / Influence 
Low
High 
High 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 7>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.7 
♦ 
LOW PRIORITY Stakeholders: Low power, less interested people - 
Organisation should only monitor them with no actions to satisfy their 
expectations. Strategically, minimal efforts should be spent on this group of 
stakeholders while keeping an eye to check if their levels of interest or power 
change. For example, business magazines, media houses, etc. 
♦ 
KEEP INFORMED Stakeholders: Low power, highly interested people - 
Organisation should adequately inform this group of people and 
communicate with them to ensure that no major issues arise. These audiences 
can also help with real time feedback and areas of improvement for an 
organisation. For example, employees, vendors, suppliers, legal experts, etc. 
An important thing that strategists should be aware of is the importance of 
remembering that the environment is highly dynamic and certain things might 
happen that can cause stakeholders to suddenly move between quadrants.   
For example, an organisation might inadvertently contravene a regulation, say GST 
compliance which would cause the regulatory body i.e. the Indirect Taxes 
Department to move from High Power, Low Interest to High Power, High Interest. 
This would then require a different way of managing and communicating with this 
stakeholder. Equally, the media houses would also move from Low Power, Low 
interest, to Low Power, High Interest.  So, it’s always worth re-analysing Mendelow’s 
grid for one’s organisation in the event of a change in the environment. 
Activity  
Identify and group the below stakeholders in the 4 groups as suggested by 
Mendelow for an Ecommerce startup. 
Ms. Suhasini (CEO), Mango Partners and TRIK Group (Investors), MSME Ministry, 
Customers from NorthEast India, Sellers from Rajasthan, Jandhan Bank (Lender), 
and Kumar S and Sharma T (Sr. Managers in the Co.) 
 
 
Keep Satisfied 
Key Players 
Low Priority 
Keep Informed 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 8>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.8 
3.3 
STRATEGIC DRIVERS 
An important aspect of internal analysis is assessing the current performance of the 
business. And in assessing current performance, the strategic drivers consider what 
differentiates an organisation from its competitors.  
It involves analysis of the key markets in which the organisation operates, as well 
as its key customers, the products and services it provides, the channels in which 
the products or services are delivered, and the organisation’s competitive 
advantage. Some of these components are interlinked, such as markets and 
products/services, and channels and key customers in each channel.  
There can be varied ways to assess the current performance of a business and it is 
highly subjective based on the managements metrics and ways of doing business. 
It can either be profit driven, purpose driven or any other metrics that the 
management seems to fit in. But in general, the key strategic drivers of an 
organisation include:  
♦ 
industry and markets 
♦ 
customers  
♦ 
products/services  
♦ 
channels  
3.3.1 Industry and Markets 
In terms of the internal environment, it is very important for an organisation to 
understand it’s relative position in the industry and in the market in which it 
operates. There are many ways to do this but require analysis and understanding 
of the environment. 
Similar companies are grouped together into industries. Basically, industry 
grouping is based on the primary product that a company makes or sells. For 
example, Maruti, Mahindra, Tata Motors, TVS, Bajaj Auto, are all selling 
automotives as their primary product and thus categorised into Automotive 
Industry. Similarly, Zara, H&M, Marks & Spencer, Pantaloons, Westside, Uniqlo, are 
all selling apparels and accessories for the youth, and thus categorised under 
apparels industry. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 9>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.9 
A market is defined as the sum total of all the buyers and sellers in the area or 
region under consideration. The value, cost and price of items traded are as per 
forces of supply and demand in a market. The market may be a physical entity or 
may be virtual like e-commerce websites and applications. It may further be local 
or global, depending on which all countries the business sells its products in. 
Is market the same for all businesses? 
Market refers to all the buyers and sellers of a particular product/service and so it 
would be incorrect to say that market is the same for all businesses. Each business 
has its own set of customers i.e. market and more so, each product within a 
business has its own market. For example, for a FMCG brand selling Shampoos, 
Dairy Products, Flours, Washing Powder, etc. - each product line will have a 
separate market to cater to and therefore build strategies specific to the market 
of concern. 
3.3.1.1 Analysing Industry and Markets 
Industry and market analysis is extremely important to identify one’s position as 
compared to the competitors, who can be of equal size and value, or bigger in size 
and value or even smaller and newer. A tool used for this is called - Strategic Group 
Mapping. 
A strategic group consists of those rival firms which have similar competitive 
approaches and positions in the market. Companies in the same strategic group 
can resemble one another in any of the several ways: they may have comparable 
product-line breadth, sell in the same price/quality range, emphasize the same 
distribution channels, use essentially the same product attributes to appeal to 
similar types of buyers, depend on identical technological approaches, or offer 
buyers similar services and technical assistance. An industry contains only one 
strategic group when all sellers pursue essentially identical strategies and have 
comparable market positions. At the other extreme, there are as many strategic 
groups as there are competitors when each rival pursues a distinctively different 
competitive approach and occupies a substantially different competitive position 
in the marketplace. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 10>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.10 
The procedure for constructing a strategic group map and deciding which firms 
belong in which strategic group is straightforward: 
♦ 
Identify the competitive characteristics that differentiate firms in the industry 
typical variables are price/quality range (high, medium, low); geographic 
coverage (local, regional, national, global); degree of vertical integration 
(none, partial, full); product-line breadth (wide, narrow); use of distribution 
channels (one, some, all); and degree of service offered (no-frills, limited, full) 
♦ 
Plot the firms on a two-variable map using pairs of these differentiating 
characteristics. 
♦ 
Assign firms that fall in about the same strategy space to the same strategic 
group. 
♦ 
Draw circles around each strategic group making the circles proportional to 
the size of the group’s respective share of total industry sales revenues. 
 
Explanation of Diagram (Strategic Group Mapping) 
Reputation amongst consumers 
Few 
Many
Range of products 
Strategic Group Mapping 
GHI 
PQR 
XYZ 
DEF 
ABC 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 11>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.11 
ABC, DEF, GHI, XYZ AND PQR are companies operating in the same industry. Let us 
assume these all are companies selling Laptops. 
Now on the Y-Axis (vertical) is the reputation of the company and on the X-Axis 
(horizontal) is the range of their products.  
The Reputation is depicted through the size of the bubble of the company along 
with how high it is on the Y-Axis. While on the X-Axis, we can see how huge their 
product range is, whether they have few models or they have many models on offer 
for the customers. 
A simple glance of the mapping chart shows us that even though ABC has few 
models, but it has great reputation in the market. Similarly, GHI has a good range 
of products and is the most reputed company in laptops. Another view is that XYZ 
and GHI have the same number of models as both are on the same place on X-Axis, 
but GHI has much greater reputation than XYZ, as it has a bigger bubble and is 
higher on the Y-Axis. 
Strategists can analyze the market by making any number of scenarios like above 
to understand the competition. Thus, this analysis helps a business understand its 
competition in terms of two or more factors (like reputation and range of products 
in this case) in a single graphical representation. 
3.3.2 Customers 
Understanding the different types of customers to whom the organisation’s 
products/services are sold or provided, is not only important but also the first step 
in deciding the product/service. Different customers may have different needs and 
require different sales models or distribution channels.  
Consider the example of a headphones brand - the customers can be grouped 
under high value buyers, medium value buyers and low value buyers based on the 
amount they are willing to spend on a product, thus helping the business 
understand their key customers and focus areas of improvement. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 12>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.12 
 
As customers are often responsible for the generation of profits obtained by an 
organisation, it is important to be able to collect and display data in order to show 
customer trends and profitability. Issues with customers can be identified, and 
target areas for growth can be pursued based on the findings. 
Another interesting concept is the difference between Customer and Consumer - 
while a customer is the one buys a product/service, the consumer is the one who 
finally uses/consumes the bought product or service. For example - A parent 
buying stationery products for their kids might be the customers, but consumers 
of stationery are the kids who would actually use it. Thus, understanding both is 
important for the marketers.  
From a pricing perspective - the customer is of more importance and from value 
creation and design/usability, consumer needs to be the kept at the center of 
decision making. 
Customer versus Consumer 
A simple bifurcation yet extremely important for strategy build up. Consumers 
are the ones who finally use a product/service, while customers are the buyers of 
that product. A customer can be a consumer and vice versa. But for strategy 
teams especially marketing teams it is important to understand the customer and 
consumer separately. For example, baby diapers are bought by parents 
(customers) who are willing to pay higher price for higher quality, while the real 
consumers are the babies, who are more concerned about the comfort and 
easiness of the diaper. If babies do not accept the product i.e. if consumers aren’t 
satisfied, it is difficult to retain the buyer i.e. customers as well. 
0
20
40
60
80# of Customers in thousands
High Value (INR 3,500 -5,500)
Medium Value (INR 1,500 - 3,500)
Low Value (< INR 1,500)
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 13>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.13 
3.3.3 Product/Services 
Products and services are closely linked and interrelated with the markets that the 
organisation wants to serve. In this component of the strategic drivers’ analysis, 
business identifies the key products/ services that the organisation offers and how 
those products/services are performing. It attempts to answer the general question: 
What business are we in and what should be done to win over competition in each 
product/service we serve. 
Product stands for the combination of “goods-and-services” that the company 
offers to the target market. Strategies are needed for managing existing product 
over time, adding new ones and dropping failed products. Strategic decisions must 
also be made regarding branding, packaging and other product features such as 
warranties. The products can also be classified on the basis of industrial or 
consumer products, essentials or luxury products, durables or perishables.   
There are products that have a wide range of quality and workmanship and these 
also change over time since products and markets are infinitely dynamic. An 
organization has to capture such dynamics through a set of policies and strategies. 
Some products have consistent customer demand over long period of time while 
others have short life spans.  
Products can also be differentiated on the basis of size, shape, colour, packaging, 
brand names, after-sales service and so on. Organizations seek to hammer into 
customers’ minds that their products are different from others. It does not matter 
whether the differentiation is real or imaginary. Quite often the differentiation is 
psychological rather than physical. It is enough if customers are persuaded to 
believe that the marketer’s product is different from others. For example, 
Shampoos with different branding namely Head & Shoulders, Olay, Old Spice, 
Pantene are all produced by the same company P&G. 
Organizations formalize product differentiation through designating ‘brand names’ 
to their respective products. These are generally reinforced with legal sanctions and 
protection. Brands enable customers to identify the product and the organization 
behind it. The products and even firms’ image is built around brands through 
advertising and other promotional strategies. Customers tend to develop strong 
brand loyalty for a particular product over a period of time. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 14>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.14 
For a new product, pricing strategies for entering a market need to be designed 
and for that matter at least three objectives must be kept in mind: 
♦ 
Have a customer-centric approach while making a product. 
♦ 
Produce sufficient returns through a reasonable margin over cost. 
♦ 
Increasing market share. 
Products and services need heavy investment in reaching out to customers. Over 
the years, a number of marketing strategies have been evolved, which are given to 
handle marketing strategically and fight the competition in the market. 
♦ 
Social Marketing: It refers to the design, implementation, and control of 
programs seeking to increase the acceptability of a social ideas, cause, or 
practice among a target group to bring in social change. For instance, the 
publicity campaign for prohibition of smoking in Delhi explained the place 
where one can and can’t smoke and also indicates that smoking is injurious 
to health. 
♦ 
Augmented Marketing: This type of marketing includes additional customer 
services and benefits that a product can offer besides the core and actual 
product that is being offered. It can be in the form of the introduction of hi-
tech services like movies on demand, online computer repair services, 
secretarial services, etc. Such innovative offerings provide a set of benefits 
that promise to elevate customer service to unprecedented levels. 
♦ 
Direct Marketing: Marketing through various advertising media that interact 
directly with consumers, generally calling for the consumer to make a direct 
response. Direct marketing includes catalogue selling, e-mail, telecomputing, 
electronic marketing, shopping, and TV shopping. 
♦ 
Relationship Marketing: The process of creating, maintaining, and 
enhancing strong, value-laden relationships with customers and other 
stakeholders. For example, Airlines offer special lounges at major airports for 
frequent flyers. Thus, providing special benefits to select customers to 
strengthen bonds. It can go a long way in building relationships. 
♦ 
Services Marketing: It is applying the concepts, tools, and techniques of 
marketing to services. Services is any activity or benefit that one party can 
offer to another that is essentially intangible. This marketing requires 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 15>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.15 
different marketing strategies since it has peculiar characteristics of its own 
such as inseparability, variability etc. 
♦ 
Person Marketing: People can also be marketed. Person marketing consists 
of activities undertaken to create, maintain or change attitudes and behaviour 
towards particular person. For example, politicians, sports stars, film stars, etc. 
i.e., market themselves to get votes, or to promote their careers. 
♦ 
Organization Marketing: It consists of activities undertaken to create, 
maintain, or change attitudes and behaviour of target audiences towards an 
organization. Both profit and non-profit organizations practice organization 
marketing. 
♦ 
Place Marketing: Place marketing involves activities undertaken to create, 
maintain, or change attitudes and behaviour towards particular places say, 
marketing of business sites, tourism marketing. 
♦ 
Enlightened Marketing: It is a marketing philosophy holding that a 
company’s marketing should support the best long-run performance of the 
marketing system that is beyond the prevailing mindset; its five principles 
include customer-oriented marketing, innovative marketing, value marketing, 
sense-of-mission marketing, and societal marketing. 
♦ 
Differential Marketing: It is a market-coverage strategy in which a firm 
decides to target several market segments and designs separate offers for 
each. For example, Hindustan Unilever Limited has Lifebuoy, Lux and Rexona 
in the popular segment and Dove and Pears in premium segment. 
♦ 
Synchro-marketing: When the demand for a product is irregular due to 
season, some parts of the day, or on hour basis, causing idle capacity or 
overworked capacities, synchro-marketing can be used to find ways to alter 
the pattern of demand through flexible pricing, promotion, and other 
incentives. For example, products such as movie tickets can be sold at lower 
prices over weekdays to generate demand. 
♦ 
Concentrated Marketing: It is a market-coverage strategy in which a firm 
goes after a large share of one or few sub-markets. It can also take the form 
of Niche marketing. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 16>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.16 
♦ 
Demarketing: It includes marketing strategies to reduce demand temporarily 
or permanently. The aim is not to destroy demand, but only to reduce or shift 
it. This happens when there is overfull demand. For example, buses are 
overloaded in the morning and evening, roads are busy most of the time, 
zoological parks are over-crowded on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. Here 
demarketing can be applied to regulate demand. 
3.3.4 Channels 
Channels are the distribution system by which an organisation distributes its 
product or provides its service. To understand the concept of channels let us see 
some examples of how the following companies distribute their products and 
services: 
♦ 
Lakme - sells its products via retail stores, intermediary stores (like Nykaa, 
Westside, Reliance Trends), as well as online mode like amazon, flipkart, nykaa 
online and its own website. 
♦ 
Boat Headphones - only online via e-commerce platforms like flipkart and 
amazon 
♦ 
Coca Cola - retail shops across the nation, in each district, each town as well 
as online mode via dunzo, blinkit, etc. 
All the above are the channels via which companies sell their products and services 
to the customers. The wider and stronger the channel the better position a business 
has to fight and win over competition. Also, having robust channels of business 
distribution helps keep new players away from entering the industry, thus acting as 
barriers to entry.  
There are typically three channels that should be considered: sales channel, 
product channel and service channel. 
♦ 
The sales channel - These are the intermediaries involved in selling the 
product through each channel and ultimately to the end user. The key 
question is: Who needs to sell to whom for your product to be sold to your 
end user? For example, many fashion designers use agencies to sell their 
products to retail organisations, so that consumers can access them. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 17>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.17 
♦ 
The product channel - The product channel focuses on the series of 
intermediaries who physically handle the product on its path from its 
producer to the end user. This is true of Australia Post, who delivers and 
distributes many online purchases between the seller and purchaser when 
using eBay and other online stores. 
♦ 
The service channel - The service channel refers to the entities that provide 
necessary services to support the product, as it moves through the sales 
channel and after purchase by the end user. The service channel is an 
important consideration for products that are complex in terms of installation 
or customer assistance. For example, a Bosch dishwasher may be sold in a 
Bosch showroom, and then once sold it is installed by a Bosch contracted 
plumber. 
Channel analysis is important when the business strategy is to scale up and expand 
beyond the current geographies and markets. When a business plans to grow to 
newer markets, they need to develop or leverage existing channels to get to new 
customers. Thus, analysis of channels that suit one’s products and customers is of 
utmost importance. 
For example - if a healthcare brand wants to reach out to elderly customers - they 
need to be more focused on offline mode of business where agents reach out 
physically to the elderly as most of their potential customers (i.e. the old aged) are 
not active on smartphones.  
Another example being - if a new drink brand wants to acquire customers - they 
need to place their products via every channel possible to get more attraction from 
customers like placing their drinks in stores, and shops alike, offering competitive 
campaigns to create awareness via online modes (social media) and so and so forth. 
Thus, channels, the partners in growth, play a crucial role in internal strategic 
alignment. 
Ever been to a hill station or a desert or a far-off location on vacation, and still 
had access to bottled water and cold drinks? 
This is possible because of strong channels of distribution. Some of the most 
renowned brands who have created competitive advantage in channels are Coca 
Cola, HUL, Patanjali, Asian Paints, Ola, to name a few. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 18>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.18 
3.4 
ROLE OF RESOURCES AND CAPABILITIES: 
 
BUILDING CORE COMPETENCY 
An organization may be viewed as an entity endowed with resources and 
capabilities. These resources and capabilities may be so synergized as to impart 
distinct competencies that the organization may leverage to its advantage. C.K. 
Prahalad and Gary Hamel have advocated a concept of core competency, which is 
a widely used concept in management theories. They defined core competency as 
the collective learning in the organization, especially coordinating diverse 
production skills and integrating multiple streams of technologies. An 
organization’s combination of technological and managerial know-how, wisdom 
and experience are a complex set of capabilities and resources that can lead to a 
competitive advantage compared to a competitor.  
Competency is defined as a combination of skills and techniques rather than 
individual skill or separate technique. For core competencies, it is characteristic to 
have a combination of skills and techniques, which makes the whole organization 
utilize these several separate individual capabilities. Therefore, core competencies 
cannot be built on one capability or single technological know-how, instead, it has 
to be the integration of many resources. The optimal way to define core 
competence is to consider it as sum of 5- 15 areas of developed expertise.  
According to C.K. Prahalad and Gary Hamel, major core competencies are identified 
in three areas - 
♦ 
competitor differentiation,  
♦ 
customer value, and  
♦ 
application to other markets 
Competitor differentiation is one of the main three conditions. The company can 
consider having a core competence if the competence is unique and it is difficult 
for competitors to imitate. This can provide a company with an edge compared 
to competitors. It allows the company to provide better products or services to 
market with no fear that competitors can copy it. The company has to keep on 
improving these skills in order to sustain its competitive position. Competence does 
not necessarily have to exist within one company in order to define as core 
competence. Although all companies operating in the same market would have the 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 19>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.19 
equal skills and resources, if one company can perform this significantly better; the 
company has obtained a core competence. For example, it is quite difficult to 
imitate patented innovation, like Tesla has been winning over competition in 
electric vehicles.  
The second condition to be met is customer value. When purchasing a product or 
service it has to deliver a fundamental benefit for the end customer in order to be 
a core competence. It will include all the skills needed to provide fundamental 
benefits. The service or the product has to have a real impact on the customer as 
the reason to choose to purchase them. If a customer has chosen the company 
without this impact, then competence is not a core competence, and it will not 
affect the company’s market position. The essence is that the consumer should 
value the differentiation offered. Without it, the core competency does not make 
sense. 
The last condition refers to the application of competencies to other markets. 
Core competence must be applicable to the whole organization; it cannot be only 
one particular skill or specified area of expertise. Therefore, although some special 
capability would be essential or crucial for the success of business activity, it will 
not be considered as core competence if it is not fundamental from the whole 
organization’s point of view. Thus, a core competence is a unique set of skills and 
expertise, which will be used throughout the organisation to open up potential 
markets to be exploited. 
If the three above-mentioned conditions are met, then the company can regard its 
competence as core competency. 
Core competencies are often visible in the form of organizational functions. For 
example, Marketing and Sales is a core competence of Hindustan Unilever Limited 
(HUL) This means that HUL has used its resources to form marketing related 
capabilities that in turn allow it to market its products in ways that are superior 
those of competitors. Because of this core competence, HUL is capable of launching 
new brands in the market successfully. 
A core competency for a firm is whatever it does best: For example: Wal-Mart 
focuses on lowering its operating costs. The cost advantage that Wal-Mart has 
created for itself has allowed the retailer to price goods lower than most 
competitors. The core competency in this case is derived from the company’s ability 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 20>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.20 
to generate large sales volume, allowing the company to remain profitable with a 
low profit margin.  
Core competencies are the knowledge, skills, and facilities necessary to design and 
produce core products. Core competencies are created by superior integration of 
technological, physical and human resources. They represent distinctive skills as 
well as intangible, invisible, intellectual assets and cultural capabilities. Cultural 
capabilities refer to the ability to manage change, the ability to learn and  
teamwork. Organizations should be viewed as a bundle of a few core competencies, 
each supported by several individual skills. Core Competence-based diversification 
reduces risk and investment and increases the opportunities for transferring 
learning and best practice across business units.  
Core technological competencies are also corporate assets; and as assets, they 
facilitate corporate access to a variety of markets and businesses. For competitive 
advantage, a core technological competence should be difficult for the competitors 
to imitate. 
3.4.1 Criteria for building a Core Competencies (CC)? 
Four specific criteria of sustainable competitive advantage that firms can use to 
determine those capabilities that are core competencies. Capabilities that are 
valuable, rare, costly to imitate, and non-substitutable are core competencies. 
i. 
Valuable: Valuable capabilities are the ones that allow the firm to exploit 
opportunities or avert the threats in its external environment. A firm created 
value for customers by effectively using capabilities to exploit opportunities. 
Finance companies build a valuable competence in financial services. In 
addition, to make such competencies as financial services highly successful 
requires placing the right people in the right jobs. Human capital is important 
in creating value for customers. 
ii. 
Rare: Core competencies are very rare capabilities and very few of the 
competitors possess these. Capabilities possessed by many rivals are unlikely 
to be sources of competitive advantage for any one of them. Competitive 
advantage results only when firms develop and exploit valuable capabilities 
that differ from those shared with competitors. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 21>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.21 
iii. 
Costly to imitate: Costly to imitate means such 
capabilities that competing firms are unable to develop 
easily. For example, Intel has enjoyed a first-mover 
advantage more than once because of its rare fast R&D 
cycle time capability that brought SRAM and DRAM 
integrated circuit technology and brought microprocessors to market well ahead 
of the competitor. The product could be imitated in due course of time, but it 
was much more difficult to imitate the R&D cycle time capability.              
iv. 
Non-substitutable: Capabilities that do not have strategic equivalents are 
called non-substitutable capabilities. This final criterion for a capability to be 
a source of competitive advantage is that there must be no strategically 
equivalent valuable resources that are themselves either not rare or imitable. 
 
For example, For years, firms tried to imitate Tata’s low-cost 
strategy, but most have been unable to duplicate Tata’s success. 
They did not realize that Tata has a unique culture and attracts 
some of the top talent in the industry. The culture and excellent 
human capital worked together in implementing Tata’s strategy 
and are the basis for its competitive advantage.  
 
The strategic value of capabilities increases as they become more difficult to 
substitute.  
 
For example, Competitors are deeply aware about Apple’s 
operating system’s (iOS) successful model. However, to date, no 
competitor has been able to imitate Apple’s capabilities. These are 
also protected through copyrights.    
To sum up, we can say that only when a capability is valuable, rare, costly to imitate, 
and non-substitutable, it is a core competence and a source of competitive 
advantage. Over a time, core competencies must be supported. Core competencies 
are a source of competitive advantage only when they allow the firm to create value 
by exploiting opportunities in its external environment.  
Zero Customer Complaints! 
Airtel has its marketing campaign that talks about - Zero Customer Complaints. 
This is about creating a core competency of great customer service.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 22>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.22 
3.5 
COMBINING EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL 
 
ANALYSIS (SWOT ANALYSIS)  
SWOT analysis is the analysis of a business’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities 
and threats. The primary objective of a SWOT analysis is to help organizations 
develop a full awareness of all the factors (external as well as internal), involved in 
making a business decision. 
SWOT analysis shall be implemented before all company actions, whether it is 
exploring new initiatives, revamping internal policies, considering opportunities to 
grow or alter a plan midway. One shall also use SWOT analysis to discover 
recommendations and strategies, with a focus on leveraging strengths and 
opportunities to overcome weaknesses and threats. 
Since its creation, SWOT has been the most widely used tool for business owners 
to grow their companies. Sometimes it’s wise to perform SWOT analysis just to 
check on the current landscape of your business to improve business operations as 
needed. The analysis can show areas where an organization is performing well, as 
well as areas that need improvement. 
 
 
Helpful 
to achieving the objective 
Harmful 
to achieving the objective 
Internal origin 
(attributes to the 
organization 
 
 
External origin 
(attributes to the  
environment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           SWOT Analysis 
 
S 
Strengths 
O T 
W 
Opportunities 
Threats 
Weaknesses 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 23>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.23 
SWOT Analysis Example 
Let us understand with an example of a law firm - what could its SWOT analysis 
help understand about its business. 
STRENGTH 
WEAKNESS 
Multiple Partners with varied expertise 
Long Term contractual service agreements 
70 years of brand value 
Services spread across 20 states of India 
400+ employee strength to deliver work 
Run by old methods  
No 
automation 
of 
work 
and 
documentation 
Not very employee friendly culture 
OPPORTUNITY 
THREAT 
Automation driven advancement. 
Startups 
can 
be 
supported 
with 
experienced partners. 
Investment in technology can multiply 
returns. 
 
Online players entering market. 
AI based solutions and applications. 
Price point of online being very 
competitive 
Speed of work becoming faster by the 
day. 
The benefit of this analysis is that it identifies the complex issues for an organisation 
and puts them into a simple framework. While on the other hand, one of the major 
criticisms of this tool is that it does not generally provide for evaluation of 
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats in the competitive context.  
Therefore, an organisation while using this tool, SWOT analysis, should consider 
relative competitors, and external factors affecting the organisation. Although a 
simple tool, it is a useful starting point for analysis. 
SWOT Analysis for Internal or External Environment? 
SWOT stands for Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats. Internal 
analysis is more focused on understanding the existing structure and 
competencies of the business, thus highlighting the Strengths and Weaknesses, 
while External Analysis is about identifying and preparing for uncontrollable 
which can either be Opportunities or threats.  
Therefore, SWOT Analysis is a tool which is used for both Internal and External 
Analysis. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 24>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.24 
3.6 
COMPETITIVE 
ADVANTAGE: 
USING 
 
MICHAEL PORTER’S GENERIC STRATEGIES 
Why do some companies succeed while others fail?  
Why did Hindustan Motors do so well for several decades?  
How did Apple return from near obsolescence in the late 1990s and become the 
world leader and a dominant technology company of today?  
In the Indian airline industry, how has Indigo Airlines managed to keep increasing 
its revenues and profits through both good times and bad, while rivals struggled? 
For most, if not all, companies, achieving superior performance relative to rivals is 
the ultimate challenge. If a company’s strategies result in superior performance, it 
is said to have a competitive advantage. 
Strategic management involves development of competencies that managers can 
use to achieve better performance and a competitive advantage for their 
organization. Competitive advantage allows a firm to gain an edge over rivals when 
competing. ‘It is a set of unique features of a company and its products that are 
perceived by the target market as significant and superior to the competition.’  
In other words, an organization is said to have competitive advantage if its 
profitability is higher than the average profitability for all companies in its industry. 
“If you don’t have a competitive advantage, don’t compete” 
- Jack Welch 
The competitive advantage is the achieved advantage over rivals when a company’s 
profitability is greater than the average profitability of firms in its industry. It is 
achieved when the firm successfully formulates and implements the value creation 
strategy and other firms are unable to duplicate it or find it too costly to imitate. 
Further, it can be said that a firm is successful in achieving competitive advantage 
only after other firm’s efforts to duplicate or imitate it fails.  
3.6.1 Sustainability of Competitive Advantage 
The sustainability of competitive advantage and a firm’s ability to earn profits from 
its competitive advantage depends upon four major characteristics of resources 
and capabilities:  
i.  
Durability: The period over which a competitive advantage is sustained 
depends in part on the rate at which a firm’s resources and capabilities 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 25>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.25 
deteriorate. In industries where the rate of product innovation is fast, product 
patents are quite likely to become obsolete. Similarly, capabilities which are 
the result of the management expertise of the CEO are also vulnerable to his 
or her retirement or departure. On the other hand, many consumer brand 
names have a highly durable appeal.  
ii.  
Transferability: Even if the resources and capabilities on which a competitive 
advantage is based are durable, it is likely to be eroded by competition from 
rivals. The ability of rivals to attack position of competitive advantage relies 
on their gaining access to the necessary resources and capabilities. The easier 
it is to transfer resources and capabilities between companies, the less 
sustainable will be the competitive advantage which is based on them. 
iii.  
Imitability: If resources and capabilities cannot be purchased by a would-be 
imitator, then they must be built from scratch. How easily and quickly can the 
competitors build the resources and capabilities on which a firm’s competitive 
advantage is based? This is the true test of imitability. For example, In 
financial services, innovations lack legal protection and are easily copied. Here 
again the complexity of many organizational capabilities can provide a degree 
of competitive defense. Where capabilities require networks of organizational 
routines, whose effectiveness depends on the corporate culture, imitation is 
difficult. 
iv.  
Appropriability: Appropriability refers to the ability of the firm’s owners to 
appropriate the returns on its resource base. Even where resources and 
capabilities are capable of offering sustainable advantage, there is an issue as 
to who receives the returns on these resources. This means, that rewards are 
directed to from where the funds were invested, rather than creating an 
advantage with no actual reward to people to invested capital. 
3.6.2 Michael Porter’s Generic Strategies 
According to Porter, strategies allow organizations to gain competitive advantage 
from three different bases: cost leadership, differentiation, and focus. Porter called 
these base generic strategies. These strategies have been termed generic, because 
they can be pursued by any type or size of business firm and even by not-for-profit 
organisations.  
♦ 
Cost leadership emphasizes on producing standardized products at a very 
low per-unit cost for consumers who are price-sensitive.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 26>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.26 
♦ 
Differentiation is a strategy aimed at producing products and services 
considered unique industry-wide and directed at consumers who are 
relatively price-insensitive.  
♦ 
Focus means producing products and services that fulfil the needs of small 
groups of consumers with very specific taste. 
Porter’s strategies imply different organizational arrangements, control procedures, 
and incentive systems. Larger firms with greater access to resources typically 
compete on a cost leadership and/or differentiation basis, whereas smaller firms 
often compete on a focus basis. 
COMPETITIVE 
SCOPE 
Broad 
Target 
Cost Leadership 
Differentiation 
 
Narrow 
Target 
Focussed Cost 
Leadership 
Focussed 
Differentiation 
 
 
 
Low-Cost 
products/services 
Differentiated 
products/services 
 
 
 
COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE 
 
Figure: Michael Porter’s Generic Strategies 
Porter stresses the need for strategists to perform cost-benefit analysis to evaluate 
“sharing opportunities” among the firm’s existing and potential business units. 
Sharing activities and resources enhances competitive advantage by lowering costs 
or raising differentiation. In addition to prompting sharing, Porter stresses the need 
for firms to “transfer” skills and expertise among autonomous business units 
effectively in order to gain competitive advantage. Depending upon factors such 
as type of industry, size of firm and nature of competition, various strategies could 
yield advantages in cost leadership differentiation, and focus. 
3.6.2.1 Cost Leadership Strategy 
It is a low-cost competitive strategy that aims at broad mass market. It requires 
vigorous pursuit of cost reduction in the areas of procurement, production, storage 
and distribution of product or service and also economies in overhead costs. 
Because of its lower costs, the cost leader is able to charge a lower price for its 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 27>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.27 
products than most of its competitors and still earn satisfactory profits. For 
example, McDonald’s fast-food restaurants have successfully followed low-cost 
leadership strategy. Decathlon Group’s mega sports stores have been following 
low-cost leadership strategy to gain international recognition and also beat 
competition. 
A primary reason for pursuing forward, backward, and horizontal integration 
strategies is to gain cost leadership benefits. Generally, cost leadership must be 
pursued in conjunction with differentiation. A number of cost elements affect the 
relative attractiveness of generic strategies, including economies or diseconomies 
of scale achieved, learning and experience curve effects, the percentage of capacity 
utilization achieved, and linkages with suppliers and distributors. Other cost 
elements to consider while choosing among alternative generic strategies include 
the potential for sharing costs and knowledge within the organization, R&D costs 
associated with new product development or modification of existing products, 
labour costs, tax rates, energy costs, and shipping costs. This internal strategy of 
sharing resources to build a competitive advantage is called synergy benefit. 
Striving to be a low-cost producer in an industry can especially be effective,  
♦ 
when the market is composed of many price-sensitive buyers and  
♦ 
when there are few ways to achieve product differentiation.  
Further, when buyers do not care much about differences from brand to brand, or 
when there are a large number of buyers with significant bargaining power. The 
basic idea is to underprice competitors and thereby gain market share driving some 
of the competitors out of the market. 
A successful cost leadership strategy usually permeates the entire firm, as 
evidenced by high efficiency, low overheads, limited perks, intolerance of waste, 
intensive screening of budget requests, wide span of controls, rewards linked to 
cost containment, and broad employee participation in cost control efforts.  
Some risks of pursuing cost leadership are;  
♦ 
that competitors may imitate the strategy, therefore driving overall industry 
profits down;  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 28>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.28 
♦ 
that technological breakthroughs in the industry may make the strategy 
ineffective; or that buyer interests may swing to other differentiating features 
besides price.  
Achieving Cost Leadership Strategy 
To achieve cost leadership, following actions could be taken: 
1. 
Prompt forecasting of demand of a product or service. 
2. 
Optimum utilization of the resources to achieve cost advantages. 
3. 
Achieving economies of scale; thus, lower per unit cost of product/service. 
4. 
Standardisation of products for mass production to yield lower cost per unit. 
(Example of McDonald’s) 
5. 
Invest in cost saving technologies and using advance technology for smart 
efficient working.  
6. 
Resistance to differentiation till it becomes essential. 
Advantages of Cost Leadership Strategy 
A cost leadership strategy may help to remain profitable even with rivalry, new 
entrants, suppliers’ power, substitute products, and buyers’ power. 
1. 
Rivalry – Competitors are likely to avoid a price war, since the low-cost firm 
will continue to earn profits even after competitors compete away their profits. 
2. 
Buyers – Powerful buyers/customers would not be able to exploit the cost 
leader firm and will continue to buy its product.  
3. 
Suppliers – Cost leaders are able to absorb greater price increases from 
suppliers before they need to raise prices for customers. 
4. 
Entrants – Low-cost leaders create barriers to market entry through their 
continuous focus on efficiency and cost reduction. 
5. 
Substitutes – Low-cost leaders are more likely to lower the costs to induce 
existing customers to stay with their products, invest in developing 
substitutes, and even purchase patents. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 29>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.29 
Disadvantages of Cost Leadership Strategy 
1. 
Cost advantage may not last long as competitors may imitate cost reduction 
techniques.   
2. 
Cost leadership can succeed only if the firm can achieve higher sales volume.  
3. 
Cost leaders tend to keep their costs low by minimizing cost of advertising, 
market research, and research and development, but this approach can prove 
to be expensive in the long run. 
4. 
Technological advancement areas a great threat to cost leaders. 
3.6.2.2 Differentiation Strategy 
This strategy is aimed at broad mass market and involves the creation of a product 
or service that is perceived by the customers as unique. The uniqueness can be 
associated with product design, brand image, features, technology, dealer network 
or customer service. Because of differentiation, the business can charge a premium 
for its product. For example, Domino’s Pizza has been offering home delivery 
within 30 minutes or the order is free, is a unique selling point that differentiates if 
from its rivals. 
Differentiation does not guarantee competitive advantage, especially if standard 
products sufficiently meet customer needs or if rapid imitation by competitors is 
possible. Durable products protected by barriers to quick imitation by competitors’ 
areas better. Successful differentiation can mean greater product flexibility, greater 
compatibility, 
lower costs, 
improved 
service, 
less 
maintenance, 
greater 
convenience, or more features. Product development is an example of a strategy 
that offers the advantages of differentiation. 
Differentiation strategy should be pursued only after a careful study of buyers’ 
needs and preferences to determine the feasibility of incorporating one or more 
differentiating features into a unique product that features the customers’ desired 
attributes.  
A successful differentiation strategy allows a firm to charge a higher price for its 
product and to gain customer loyalty, because consumers may become strongly 
attached to the differentiated features. Special features that differentiate one’s 
product can include superior service, spare parts availability, engineering design, 
product performance, useful life, gas mileage, or ease of use.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 30>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.30 
A risk associated with pursuing a differentiation strategy is that the unique product 
may not be valued high enough by customers to justify the higher price. When this 
happens, a cost leadership strategy will easily defeat a differentiation strategy. 
Another risk of pursuing a differentiation strategy is that competitors may develop 
ways to copy the differentiating features quickly. Firms must find durable sources 
of uniqueness that cannot be imitated quickly or cheaply by rival firms. 
For example, Amazon Prime offers deliver within two hours. This is quite difficult 
to imitate by its rivals, and thus this differentiating factor helps it to lead the market. 
Basis of Differentiation 
There are several bases of differentiation, major being: Product, Pricing and 
Organization. 
♦ 
Product: Innovative products that meet customer needs can be an area 
where a company has an advantage over competitors. However, the pursuit 
of a new product offering can be costly – research and development, as well 
as production and marketing costs can all add to the cost of production and 
distribution. The payoff, however, can be great as customer’s flock to be 
among the first to have the new product. For example, Apple iPhone, has 
invested huge amounts of money in R&D, and the customers’ value that. They 
want to be among the first ones to try the new offerings from the company. 
♦ 
Pricing: It fluctuates based on its supply and demand and may also be 
influenced by the customer’s ideal value for a product. Companies that 
differentiate based on product price can either determine to offer the lowest 
price or can attempt to establish superiority through higher prices. For 
example, Apple iPhone dominates the smart phone segment by charging 
higher prices for its products. 
♦ 
Organisation: Organisational differentiation is yet another form of 
differentiation. Maximizing the power of a brand or using the specific 
advantages that an organization possesses can be instrumental to a 
company’s success. Location advantage, name recognition and customer 
loyalty can all provide additional ways for a company differentiate itself from 
the competition.  For example, Apple has been building customer loyalty 
since years and has a fanbase of consumers that are called “Apple 
Fanboys/Fangirls”. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 31>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.31 
Achieving Differentiation Strategy 
To achieve differentiation, following strategies could be adopted by an 
organisation: 
1. 
Offer utility to the customers and match products with their tastes and 
preferences. 
2. 
Elevate/Improve performance of the product. 
3. 
Offer the high-quality product/service for buyer satisfaction. 
4. 
Rapid product innovation to keep up with dynamic environment. 
5. 
Taking steps for enhancing brand image and brand value. 
6. 
Fixing product prices based on the unique features of product and buying 
capacity of the customer. 
Advantages of Differentiation Strategy 
A differentiation strategy may help an organisation to remain profitable even with 
rivalry, new entrants, suppliers’ power, substitute products, and buyers’ power. 
1. 
Rivalry - Brand loyalty acts as a safeguard against competitors. It means that 
customers will be less sensitive to price increases, as long as the firm can 
satisfy the needs of its customers. 
2. 
Buyers – They do not negotiate for price as they get special features and they 
have fewer options in the market. 
3. 
Suppliers – Because differentiators charge a premium price, they can afford to 
absorb higher costs of supplies as the customers are willing to pay extra too. 
4. 
Entrants – Innovative features are an expensive offer. So, new entrants 
generally avoid these features because it is tough for them to provide the 
same product with special features at a comparable price.  
5. 
Substitutes – Substitute products can’t replace differentiated products which 
have high brand value and enjoy customer loyalty.  
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 32>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.32 
Disadvantages of Differentiation Strategy 
1. 
In the long term, uniqueness is difficult to sustain. 
2. 
Charging too high a price for differentiated features may cause the customer 
to switch-off to another alternative. As we see a shift of iPhone users to other 
android flagship smart phones. 
3. 
Differentiation fails to work if its basis is something that is not valued by the 
customers. Home delivery of packed snacks in 30 minutes would not even be 
a differentiator as the consumer wouldn’t value such an offer. 
3.6.2.3 Focus Strategies 
A successful focus strategy depends on an industry segment that is of sufficient 
size, has good growth potential, and is not crucial to the success of other major 
competitors. Strategies such as market penetration (new product for existing 
customers) and market development (new product for new customers) offer 
substantial focusing advantages. Midsize and large firms can effectively pursue 
focus-based strategies only in conjunction with differentiation or cost leadership-
based strategies. All firms in essence follow a differentiated strategy. Because only 
one firm can differentiate itself with the lowest cost, the remaining firms in the 
industry must find other ways to differentiate their products.  
Focus strategies are most effective when consumers have distinctive preferences or 
requirements, and when the rival firms are not attempting to specialize in the same 
target segment. Risks of pursuing a focus strategy include the possibility of 
numerous competitors recognizing the successful focus strategy and imitating it, 
or that consumer preferences may drift towards the product attributes desired by 
the market as a whole. An organization using a focus strategy may concentrate on 
a particular group of customers, geographic markets, or on particular product-line 
segments in order to serve a well-defined but narrow market better than 
competitors who serve a broader market. For example, Ferrari sports cars. 
Focused cost leadership: A focused cost leadership strategy requires competing 
based on price to target a narrow market. A firm that follows this strategy does not 
necessarily charge the lowest prices in the industry. Instead, it charges low prices 
relative to other firms that compete within the target market. Firms that compete 
based on price and target a narrow market follow a focused cost leadership 
strategy. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 33>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.33 
Focused differentiation: A focused differentiation strategy requires offering 
unique features that fulfil the demands of a narrow market. Similar to focused low-
cost strategy, narrow markets are defined in different ways in different settings. 
Some firms using a focused differentiation strategy concentrate their efforts on a 
particular sales channel, such as selling over the internet only. Others target 
particular demographic groups. Firms that compete based on uniqueness and 
target a narrow market are following a focused differentiations strategy. For 
example, Rolls-Royce sells limited number of high-end, custom-built cars.  
Achieving Focused Strategy 
To achieve focused cost leadership/differentiation, following strategies could be 
adopted by an organization: 
1. 
Selecting specific niches which are not covered by cost leaders and 
differentiators. 
2. 
Creating superior skills for catering such niche markets. 
3. 
Generating high efficiencies for serving such niche markets.  
4. 
Developing innovative ways in managing the value chain. 
Advantages of Focused Strategy 
1. 
Premium prices can be charged by the organisations for their focused 
product/services.  
2. 
Due to the tremendous expertise in the goods and services that the 
organisations following focus strategy offer, rivals and new entrants may find 
it difficult to compete. 
Disadvantages of Focused Strategy 
1. 
The firms lacking in distinctive competencies may not be able to pursue focus 
strategy.  
2. 
Due to the limited demand of product/services, costs are high, which can cause 
problems. 
3. 
In the long run, the niche could disappear or be taken over by larger competitors 
by acquiring the same distinctive competencies. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 34>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.34 
3.6.2.4 Best-Cost Provider Strategy 
The new model of best cost provider strategy is a further development of above 
three generic strategies. It is directed towards giving customers more value for the 
money by emphasizing on both, low cost and upscale differences. The objective is 
to keep costs and prices lower than those of other sellers of “comparable products". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure: The Five Generic Competitive Strategies 
Best-cost provider strategy involves providing customers more value for the money 
by emphasizing on lower cost and better-quality differences. It can be done 
through:  
(a)  
offering products at lower price than what is being offered by rivals for 
products with comparable quality and features  
Or 
(b)  
charging similar price as by the rivals for products with much higher quality 
and better features. 
For example, android flagship phones from OnePlus, Xiaomi, Oppo, Vivo, etc, are 
all rooting for giving better quality at lowest prices to the customers. They are 
following the best-cost provider strategy to penetrate market.  
 
 
Overall Low-
Cost Leadership 
Strategy 
Focused Low-
Cost Strategy 
Focused 
Differentiation 
Strategy Company’s 
Broad 
Differentiation 
Strategy 
Best-Cost 
Provider 
Strategy 
Lower Cost 
Differentiation 
A Broad 
Cross-Section 
of Buyers 
A Narrower 
Buyer 
Segment (or 
Market Niche) 
Market Target 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 35>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.35 
Activity for Michael Porter’s Generic Strategies 
Use the blank space against each business idea to identify which generic strategy 
is being used; 
Business Idea 
Michael Porter’s 
Generic Strategy 
Building the best in class headphones with noise 
cancellation and premium quality ear cushions 
 
Providing maximum value features in a phone which is within 
the spendable limits of the middle class of India  
 
Being in a position to dominate the glass manufacturing 
units across the country and thus using economies of scale 
to beat competition 
 
Targeting the below poverty line individuals and providing 
them nutritious meals  
 
SUMMARY 
The understanding of internal environment becomes more important in current 
times, as dynamics change, and consumers take lead. For a business, strategising 
continuously becomes more so important for which it needs tools and access to 
decision-oriented analysis. Once analysed, the plans need to take the form of 
actions and thereby drive results. 
(i)   
Understanding key stakeholders via Mendelow’s Model - helps to identify the 
real areas of resource allocation  
(ii)   An in-depth understanding of business strategic drivers like Industry & 
markets, Customers, Channels, Product & Services, enable the business to 
think out of the box, take inspiration from peers and drive innovation 
(iii)   Core Competency with available resources and capabilities is what businesses 
should strive to build to beat competition and lead markets 
(iv)   Once identified, strategists use the classic tool of SWOT Analysis to figure out 
what suits best to the business’s nature and what is there to explore in the 
environment 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 36>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.36 
(v)   Finally, a business strives to gain competitive advantage: which can broadly be 
achieved using Michael Porter’s Generic Strategies of Cost Leadership, 
Differentiation and Focussed Differentiation, or the recent concept of Best 
Cost Provider in the market. 
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1.  
The goal of SWOT analysis is to ________ the organization's opportunities and 
strengths while ________ its threats and ________ its weaknesses. 
(a) 
avoid; neutralizing; correcting 
(b)  
exploit; neutralizing; correcting 
(c)  
avoid; capitalizing; neutralizing 
(d)  
exploit; avoiding; ignoring 
2. 
SWOT analysis is an evaluation of the organization's ________ strengths and 
weaknesses and its ________ opportunities and threats. 
(a)  
external; internal 
(b)  
internal; internal 
(c)  
external; external 
(d)  
internal; external 
3.  
External opportunities and threats are usually: 
(a) 
the minor cause of organizational demise or success 
(b) 
least important for CEOs and the board of directors 
(c) 
not as important as internal strengths and weaknesses 
(d) 
largely uncontrollable activities outside the organization 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 37>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.37 
4.  
The sustainability of competitive advantage and a firm’s ability to earn profits 
from its competitive advantage depends upon: 
(a)  
Durability, reliability, transferability, approximately 
(b)  
Appropriability, durability, transferability, imitability 
(c)  
Transferability, imitability, reliability, approximately 
(d)  
Imitability, durability, reliability, appropriability 
5. 
Internal ______ are activities in an organisation that the organisation has a 
competitive expertise in. 
(a)  
Opportunities 
(b)  
Competencies  
(c)  
Efficiency  
(d)  
Management 
6.  
‘Strategic group mapping’ helps in- 
(a) 
Identifying the strongest rival companies 
(b) 
Identifying weakest rival companies 
(c) 
Identifying weakest and strongest rival companies 
(d) 
None of the above 
7.  
In Michael Porter’s generic strategy _____________ emphasizes producing 
standardized products at a very low per unit-cost for consumers who are price 
sensitive. 
(a) 
Cheap leadership 
(b) 
Inferior product leadership 
(c) 
Cost leadership 
(d) 
Cost benefit 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 38>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.38 
8.  
Differentiation Strategy can be achieved by following measures: 
1. 
Match products with tastes and preferences of customers. 
2. 
Elevate the performance of the product. 
3. 
Rapid product innovation 
Which of the above is true: 
(a)  
(1) and (2) 
(b)  
(1) and (3) 
(c)  
(2) and (3) 
(d)  
(1), (2) and (3) 
9.  
What are the three different bases given by Michael Porter’s Generic Strategies 
to gain competitive advantage? 
(a) 
differentiation, integration and compensation 
(b) 
integration, focus and differentiation 
(c) 
compensation, integration and focus 
(d) 
cost leadership, differentiation and focus  
10.  A firm successfully implementing a differentiation strategy would expect: 
(a) 
Customers to be sensitive to price increases. 
(b) 
To charge premium prices. 
(c) 
Customers to perceive the product as standard. 
(d) 
To automatically have high levels of power over suppliers. 
Scenario Based Questions 
1.  
A beverage company is launching a new line of energy drinks targeted at 
health-conscious consumers. The strategic manager wants to study the market 
position of rival companies in the energy drink segment. Which tool can be used 
for this analysis, and what is the procedure to implement it effectively? 
2. 
EasyLife Corporation, a leading manufacturer of consumer electronics, is 
considering launching a new line of smart home devices. As a strategic manager, 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 39>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.39 
conduct a SWOT analysis for EasyLife Corporation to assess the feasibility and 
potential success of this new venture. Consider both internal and external factors 
that could impact the success of the new product line. 
3.  
ABC Ltd. is a beverage manufacturing company. It chiefly manufactures soft 
drinks. The products are priced on the lower side, which has made the company 
a leader in the business. Currently it holds 35 percent of the market share. The 
R & D of the company developed a formula for manufacturing sugar-free 
beverages. On successful trial and approval by the competent authorities, the 
company was granted to manufacture sugar free beverages.  This company is 
the pioneer to launch sugar free beverages which are sold at a relatively higher 
price.  This new product has been accepted widely by a class of customers.  These 
products have proved profitable for the company. Identify the strategy employed 
by the company ABC Ltd. and mention what measures could be adopted by the 
company to achieve the employed strategy. 
4.  
Inspite of high commodity inflation, shortage of components and the threat of 
third wave of COVID-19 pandemic in India, manufacturers of packaged goods, 
home appliances and consumer electronics are expecting the business to grow 
by 12 to 25 percent in the coming months.  After one-and-a-half years of 
disruption, manufacturers are now confident about managing their inventories 
better, keeping their supply channels well-stocked and preparing themselves to 
minimalize the impact of any COVID related restrictions even as they gear up 
for the festive season, which usually accounts for 25 to 35 percent of their yearly 
sales. 
 
The home appliances sector could be an example.  After a dismal April-June 
quarter in the year 2021, producers of air conditioners, refrigerators and 
washing machines are expecting their business to grow by 15-20 percent in the 
months to come. All the companies operating in the sector have geared up to 
grab the opportunities available in the market. 
 
A leading company in the home appliances domain, XXP India, is planning to 
launch various innovative product designs and offer loyalty programmes to lure 
consumers. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 40>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.40 
 
With reference to Michael Porter’s generic strategies, identify which strategy 
XXP India has planner for? Explain how this strategy will be advantageous to 
the company to remain profitable? 
 
5. 
Rohit Sodhi runs a charitable organisation for promotion of sports in the 
country. His organisation conducts regular free training camps for youths 
interested in playing cricket, football, hockey, badminton and so on. Many of 
his trainees have reached national level contests. Rohit noticed that with 
success of IPL (Cricket) tournament there is an increasing trend to extend 
similar format in other sports as well. He wishes to know how the development 
is going help sports and to which industries it will offer opportunities and 
threats. 
6. 
Mr. Banerjee is head of marketing department of a manufacturing company. 
His company is in direct competition with thirteen companies at national level. 
He wishes to study the market positions of rival companies by grouping them 
into like positions.  
Name the tool that may be used by Mr. Banerjee? Explain the procedure that 
may be used to implement the technique. 
7. 
Mohan has joined as the new CEO of XYZ Corporation and aims to make it a 
dominant technology company in the next five years. He aims to develop 
competencies for managers for achieving better performance and a competitive 
advantage for XYZ Corporation. Mohan is well aware of the importance of 
resources and capabilities in generating competitive advantage.  
Discuss the four major characteristics of resources and capabilities required by 
XYZ Corporation to sustain the competitive advantage and its ability to earn 
profits from it.  
8. 
Airlines industry in India is highly competitive with several players. Businesses 
face severe competition and aggressively market themselves with each other. 
Luxury Jet is a private Delhi based company with a fleet size of 9 small aircrafts 
with seating capacity ranging between 6 seats to 9 seats. There aircrafts are 
chartered by big business houses and high net worth individuals for their 
personalised use. With customised tourism packages their aircrafts are also 
often hired by foreigners. Identify and explain the Michael Porter’s Generic 
Strategy followed by Luxury Jet.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 41>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.41 
9. 
Gennex is a company that designs, manufactures and sells computer hardware 
and software. Gennex is well known for its innovative products that has helped 
the company to have advantage over its competitors. It also spends on research 
and development and concerned with innovative softwares.  Often the unique 
features of their product, that are not available with their competitors helps 
them to gain competitive advantage. Gennex using the strategy is consistently 
gaining its position in the industry over its competitors.  
Identify and explain the Porter’s generic strategy which Gennex has opted to 
gain the competitive advantage. 
10. 
Sohan and Ramesh are two friends who are partners in their business of making 
biscuits. Sohan believe in making profits through selling more volume of 
products. Hence, he believes in charging lesser price to the customers. Ramesh, 
however, of the opinion that higher price should be charged to create an image 
of exclusivity and for this, he proposes that the product to undergo some change.  
Analyse the nature of generic strategy used by Sohan and Ramesh. 
11. 
Infant care is a successful store chain that caters products for expectant mothers 
and new moms. They offer everything from nursing classes to strollers, toys, 
infant clothes, diapers and baby furniture. Due to a one-stop shop for infants, 
they are charging a premium for its products. 
Identify and explain how the strategy adopted by infant care.  
12. 
A century-old footwear company “Mota Shoes” had an image of being the 
footwear choice for formal occasions. In an attempt to reinvent its brand, it tied 
up with a foreign footwear giant “Buffrine” to manufacture and sell its Hideseek 
brand in the country. Putting its best foot forward, it launched extra soft, casual 
and relaxed footwear for young. Aiming at a brand and image makeover the 
“Mota Shoes” decided to price the Hide Seek products at premium. 
What kind of Michael Porter business level strategy is being used by “Mota Shoe 
company”? State its advantages. 
13. 
Rohit Patel is having a small chemist shop in the central part of Ahmedabad. 
What kind of competencies Rohit can build to gain competitive advantage over 
online medicine sellers? 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 42>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.42 
14. 
‘Value for Money’ is a leading retail chain, on account of its ability to operate 
its business at low costs. The retail chain aims to further strengthen its top 
position in the retail industry. Marshal, the CEO of the retail chain is of the view 
that to achieve the goals they should focus on lowering the costs of procurement 
of products.   
Highlight and explain the core competence of the ‘Value for Money’ retail chain. 
Descriptive Questions 
15. 
What is the purpose of SWOT analysis? Why is it necessary to do a SWOT 
analysis before selecting a particular strategy for a business organization? 
ANSWERS/SOLUTION 
Answers to Multiple Choice Questions 
1 
(b) 
2 
(d) 
3 
(d) 
4 
(b) 
5 
(b) 
6 
(c) 
7 
(c) 
8 
(d) 
9 
(d) 
10 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
Answers to Scenario Based Questions 
1.  
To study the market position of rival companies in the energy drink segment, 
the strategic manager can use strategic group mapping. This tool helps 
identify strategic groups, which consist of rival firms with similar competitive 
approaches and positions in the market. The procedure for implementing 
strategic group mapping effectively is as follows: 
1. 
Identify the competitive characteristics that differentiate firms in the 
industry typical variables that are price/quality range (high, medium, 
low); geographic coverage (local, regional, national, global); degree of 
vertical integration (none, partial, full); product-line breadth (wide, 
narrow); use of distribution channels (one, some, all); and degree of 
service offered (no-frills, limited, full). 
2. 
Plot the firms on a two-variable map using pairs of these 
differentiating characteristics. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 43>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.43 
3. 
Assign firms that fall in about the same strategy space to the same 
strategic group. 
4. 
Draw circles around each strategic group making the circles 
proportional to the size of the group's respective share of total industry 
sales revenues. 
 
By following these steps, the strategic manager can gain valuable insights into 
the competitive landscape of the energy drink segment and identify potential 
positioning strategies for the new line of energy drinks targeted at health-
conscious consumers. 
2.  
SWOT Analysis for EasyLife Corporation’s New Smart Home Devices Venture: 
Strengths 
• 
Strong brand reputation in 
consumer electronics. 
• 
Established 
distribution 
network. 
• 
Access 
to 
technological 
expertise 
for 
product 
development. 
• 
Financial resources to support 
product launch and marketing. 
 
Weaknesses 
• 
Limited experience in the 
smart home devices market. 
• 
May 
require 
additional 
investments in research and 
development. 
• 
Potential 
challenges 
in 
integrating a new product 
line with existing offerings. 
• 
Lack of established customer 
base for smart home devices. 
Opportunities 
• 
Growing market for smart home 
devices 
due 
to 
increasing 
consumer interest in home 
automation. 
• 
Possibility of partnering with 
existing smart home platform 
providers. 
• 
Potential to leverage brand 
loyalty from existing customers. 
• 
Ability to differentiate through 
innovative features and design. 
Threats 
• 
Intense 
competition 
from 
established players in the 
smart home devices market. 
• 
Rapid 
technological 
advancements lead to short 
product life cycles. 
• 
Potential for cybersecurity 
threats in connected devices. 
• 
Economic factors impacting 
consumer 
spending 
on 
discretionary items. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 44>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.44 
 
The SWOT analysis highlights that while EasyLife Corporation has several 
strengths that can support the launch of a new smart home devices line, 
there are also significant weaknesses and threats to consider. To 
maximize the chances of success, EasyLife Corporation should focus on 
leveraging its brand reputation and distribution network while carefully 
addressing the weaknesses and threats identified. Additionally, staying 
informed about technological developments and consumer trends will 
be essential for maintaining competitiveness in the dynamic smart home 
devices market. 
3.  
According to Porter, strategies allow organizations to gain competitive 
advantage from three different bases: cost leadership, differentiation, and 
focus. Porter called these base generic strategies.  
 
ABC Ltd. has opted for the Differentiation Strategy. The company has 
invested a huge amount in R & D and developed a formula for manufacturing 
sugar-free beverages to give the customer value and quality. They are 
pioneers and serve specific customer needs that are not met by other 
companies in the industry. The new product has been accepted by a class of 
customers. Differentiated and unique sugar-free beverages enable ABC 
Ltd. to charge relatively higher for its products, hence making higher profits 
and maintaining its competitive position in the market. 
 
Sugar free beverage of ABC Ltd. is being accepted widely by a class of 
customers. Differentiation strategy is aimed at a broad mass market and 
involves the creation of a product or service that is perceived by the customers 
as unique. The uniqueness can be associated with product design, brand 
image, features, technology, and dealer network or customer service. 
 
Achieving Differentiation Strategy 
 
To achieve differentiation, following strategies are generally adopted by an 
organization: 
1. 
Offer utility to the customers and match products with their tastes and 
preferences. 
2. 
Elevate/Improve performance of the product. 
3. 
Offer a high-quality product/service for buyer satisfaction. 
4. 
Rapid product innovation to keep up with dynamic environment. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 45>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.45 
5. 
Taking steps to enhance brand image and brand value. 
6. 
Fixing product prices based on the unique features of product and 
buying capacity of the customer.  
4.  
According to Michael Porter, strategies allow organizations to gain 
competitive advantage from three different bases: cost leadership, 
differentiation, and focus. Porter called these base generic strategies.  
XXP India Ltd. has planned for Differentiation Strategy. The company is 
planning to launch various innovative product designs and offer loyalty 
programmes to lure customers.  
 
Differentiation strategy should be pursued only after a careful study of buyers’ 
needs and preferences to determine the feasibility of incorporating one or 
more differentiating features into a unique product that features the desired 
attributes. A successful differentiation strategy allows a firm to charge a higher 
price for its product and to gain customer loyalty, because consumers may 
become strongly attached to the differentiated features. 
 
Advantages of Differentiation Strategy 
 
A differentiation strategy may help an organisation to remain profitable even 
with rivalry, new entrants, suppliers’ power, substitute products, and buyers’ 
power. 
1. 
Rivalry - Brand loyalty acts as a safeguard against competitors. It means 
that customers will be less sensitive to price increases, as long as the 
firm can satisfy the needs of its customers. 
2. 
Buyers – They do not negotiate for price as they get special features, 
and they have fewer options in the market. 
3. 
Suppliers – Because differentiators charge a premium price, they can 
afford to absorb higher costs of supplies as the customers are willing to 
pay extra too. 
4. 
Entrants – Innovative features are an expensive offer. So, new entrants 
generally avoid these features because it is tough for them to provide 
the same product with special features at a comparable price.  
5. 
Substitutes – Substitute products can’t replace differentiated products 
which have high brand value and enjoy customer loyalty.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 46>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.46 
5. 
With the success of IPL, league matches are taking place in other sports as 
well. These are held in a grandeur manner between several teams. For 
example, league matches in magnificent manner now take place in Football, 
Kabaddi and Hockey in India. These events are profit and entertainment driven. 
These are going to help sports in India by generating interest in sports, making 
them more popular, increasing quality of competition and bringing money 
into sports. 
A number of entities and processes are involved in these events from various 
industries offering opportunities and threats to them. An opportunity is a 
favourable condition in the organisation’s environment which enables it to 
strengthen its position. On the other hand, a threat is an unfavourable 
condition in the organisation’s environment which causes a risk for, or damage 
to, the organisation’s position. An opportunity is also a threat in case internal 
weaknesses do not allow organization to take their advantage in a manner 
rival can.  It will offer opportunity and threats to the following: 
Opportunities 
♦ 
Stadia. 
♦ 
Manufacturers of sports goods. 
♦ 
Media Industry – Sports channels / television, advertisers.  
♦ 
Hotel Industry linking events with their offerings. 
Threats 
♦ 
Entertainment industry engaged in TV serials, cinema theatres, 
Entertainment theme parks as competitors will be fighting for the same 
viewers/target customers. 
♦ 
Event Management organisation engaged in non-sports events. 
6. 
A tool to study the market positions of rival companies by grouping them into 
like positions is strategic group mapping. Grouping competitors is useful when 
there are many competitors such that it is not practical to examine each one 
in-depth. In the given scenario there are thirteen competitors. A strategic 
group consists of those rival firms which have similar competitive approaches 
and positions in the market.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 47>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.47 
The procedure for constructing a strategic group map and deciding which 
firms belong in which strategic group is as follows: 
♦ 
Identify the competitive characteristics that differentiate firms in the 
industry typical variables that are price/quality range (high, medium, 
low); geographic coverage (local, regional, national, global); degree of 
vertical integration (none, partial, full); product-line breadth (wide, 
narrow); use of distribution channels (one, some, all); and degree of 
service offered (no-frills, limited, full). 
♦ 
Plot the firms on a two-variable map using pairs of these differentiating 
characteristics. 
♦ 
Assign firms that fall in about the same strategy space to the same 
strategic group. 
♦ 
Draw circles around each strategic group making the circles 
proportional to the size of the group's respective share of total industry 
sales revenues. 
7. 
XYZ Corporation is aiming to transform into a dominant technology company 
under the leadership of Mohan, the new CEO. He aims to develop 
competencies for managers for achieving better performance and a 
competitive advantage for the corporation. Mohan is also well aware of the 
importance of resources and capabilities in generating and sustaining the 
competitive advantage. Therefore, he must focus on characteristics of 
resources and capabilities of the corporation.  
The sustainability of competitive advantage and a firm’s ability to earn profits 
from it depends, to a great extent, upon four major characteristics of resources 
and capabilities which are as follows:  
♦ 
Durability: The period over which a competitive advantage is sustained 
depends in part on the rate at which a firm’s resources and capabilities 
deteriorate. In industries where the rate of product innovation is fast, 
product patents are quite likely to become obsolete. Similarly, 
capabilities which are the result of the management expertise of the 
CEO are also vulnerable to his or her retirement or departure. On the 
other hand, many consumer brand names have a highly durable appeal.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 48>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.48 
♦ 
Transferability: Even if the resources and capabilities on which a 
competitive advantage is based are durable, it is likely to be eroded by 
competition from rivals. The ability of rivals to attack position of 
competitive advantage relies on their gaining access to the necessary 
resources and capabilities. The easier it is to transfer resources and 
capabilities between companies, the less sustainable will be the 
competitive advantage which is based on them. 
♦ 
Imitability: If resources and capabilities cannot be purchased by a 
would-be imitator, then they must be built from scratch. How easily and 
quickly can the competitors build the resources and capabilities on 
which a firm’s competitive advantage is based? This is the true test of 
imitability. Where capabilities require networks of organizational 
routines, whose effectiveness depends on the corporate culture, 
imitation is difficult. 
♦ 
Appropriability: Appropriability refers to the ability of the firm’s 
owners to appropriate the returns on its resource base. Even where 
resources and capabilities are capable of offering sustainable 
advantage, there is an issue as to who receives the returns on these 
resources. 
8. 
The Airlines industry faces stiff competition. However, Luxury Jet has 
attempted to create a niche market by adopting focused differentiation 
strategy. A focused differentiation strategy requires offering unique features 
that fulfil the demands of a narrow market.  
Luxury Jet compete in the market based on uniqueness and target a narrow 
market which provides business houses, high net worth individuals to 
maintain strict schedules. The option of charter flights provided several 
advantages including, flexibility, privacy, luxury and many a times cost saving. 
Apart from conveniences, the facility will provide time flexibility. Travelling by 
private jet is the most comfortable, safe and secure way of flying your 
company’s senior business personnel. 
Chartered services in airlines can have both business and private use. 
Personalized tourism packages can be provided to those who can afford it.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 49>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.49 
9. 
According to Porter, strategies allow organizations to gain competitive 
advantage from three different bases: cost leadership, differentiation, and 
focus. Porter called these base generic strategies.  
Gennex has opted differentiation strategy. Its products are designed and 
produced to give the customer value and quality. They are unique and serve 
specific customer needs that are not met by other companies in the industry. 
Highly differentiated and unique hardware and software enables Gennex to 
charge premium prices for its products hence making higher profits and 
maintain its competitive position in the market. 
Differentiation strategy is aimed at broad mass market and involves the 
creation of a product or service that is perceived by the customers as unique. 
The uniqueness can be associated with product design, brand image, 
features, technology, dealer network or customer service. 
10. 
Considering the generic strategies of Porter there are three different bases: 
cost leadership, differentiation and focus. Sohan and Ramesh are 
contemplating pricing for their product. 
Sohan is trying to have a low price and high volume is thereby trying for cost 
leadership. Cost leadership emphasizes producing standardised products at 
a very low per unit cost for consumers who are price sensitive. 
Ramesh desires to create perceived value for the product and charge higher 
prices. He is trying to adopt differentiation. Differentiation is aimed at 
producing products and services considered unique industry wide and 
directed at consumers who are relatively price insensitive.   
11. 
Infant care is opting for differentiation strategy. A one-stop shop is a benefit 
for this type of customers, seeking convenience in a time. Infant care is 
catering the products only related to an infant that is perceived by the 
customers as unique. Because of differentiation, the Infant care is charging a 
premium for its product. 
12. 
Mota shoes is trying to use differentiation. This strategy is aimed at broad 
mass market and involves the creation of a product or service that is 
perceived by the customers as unique. The uniqueness can be associated with 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 50>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.50 
product design, brand image, features, technology, dealer network or 
customer service. Because of differentiation, the business can charge a 
premium for its product.  
A differentiation strategy has definite advantages as it may help to remain 
profitable even with rivalry, new entrants, suppliers’ power, substitute 
products, and buyers’ power.  
i.  
Rivalry: Brand loyalty acts as a safeguard against competitors. It means 
that customers will be less sensitive to price increases, as long as the 
firm can satisfy the needs of its customers.  
ii.  
Buyers: They do not negotiate for price as they get special features and 
also, they have fewer options in the market.  
iii.  
Suppliers: Because differentiators charge a premium price, they can 
afford to absorb higher costs of supplies and customers are willing to 
pay extra too.  
iv.  
New entrants: Innovative features are expensive to copy. So, new 
entrants generally avoid these features because it is tough for them to 
provide the same product with special features at a comparable price.  
v.  
Substitutes: Substitute products can’t replace differentiated products 
which have high brand value and enjoy customer loyalty. 
13. 
Capabilities that are valuable, rare, costly to imitate, and non-substitutable 
are core competencies. A small chemist shop has a local presence and 
functions within a limited geographical area. Still, it can build its own 
competencies to gain competitive advantage. Rohit Patel can build 
competencies in the areas of: 
(i) 
Developing personal and cordial relations with the customers. 
(ii) 
Providing home delivery with no additional cost.  
(iii) 
Developing a system of speedy delivery that can be difficult to match by 
online sellers. Being in central part of city, he can create a network to 
supply at wider locations in the city. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 51>>
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
3.51 
(iv) 
Having extended working hours for convenience of buyers. 
(v) 
Providing easy credit or a system of monthly payments to the patients 
consuming regular medicines. 
14. 
A core competence is a unique strength of an organization which may not be 
shared by others. Core competencies are those capabilities that are critical to 
a business achieving competitive advantage. In order to qualify as a core 
competence, the competency should differentiate the business from any 
other similar businesses. A core competency for a firm is whatever it does is 
highly beneficial to the organisation. 
‘Value for Money’ is the leader on account of its ability to keep costs low. The 
cost advantage that ‘Value for Money’ has created for itself has allowed the 
retailer to price goods lower than competitors. The core competency in this 
case is derived from the company’s ability to generate large sales volume, 
allowing the company to remain profitable with low profit margin.    
Answers to Descriptive Questions 
15. 
An important component of strategic thinking requires the generation of a 
series of strategic alternatives, or choices of future strategies to pursue, given 
the company’s internal strengths and weaknesses and its external 
opportunities and threats. The comparison of strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, and threats is normally referred to as SWOT analysis.  
♦ 
Strength: Strength is an inherent capability of the organization which 
it can use to gain strategic advantage over its competitors. 
♦ 
Weakness: A weakness is an inherent limitation or constraint of the 
organization which creates strategic disadvantage to it. 
♦ 
Opportunity: An opportunity is a favourable condition in the 
organisation’s environment which enables it to strengthen its position. 
♦ 
Threat: A threat is an unfavourable condition in the organisation’s 
environment which causes a risk for, or damage to, the organisation’s 
position. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 52>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
3.52 
SWOT analysis helps managers to craft a business model (or models) that will 
allow a company to gain a competitive advantage in its industry (or 
industries). Competitive advantage leads to increased profitability, and this 
maximizes a company’s chances of surviving in the fast-changing, 
competitive environment. Key reasons for SWOT analysis are: 
♦ 
It provides a logical framework. 
♦ 
It presents a comparative account. 
♦ 
It guides the strategist in strategy identification. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
