<<PAGE 1>>
 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 
5 
  
STRATEGY  
IMPLEMENTATION 
AND EVALUATION 
 
 
 
 
 
After studying this chapter, you will be able to: 
♦ 
Describe the process of Strategy Management: From Formulation to 
Implementation 
♦ 
Evaluate the salience of strategy implementation.  
♦ 
Explain Strategic Change through Digital Transformation  
♦ 
Differentiate between Organisation Structure (hard) and Culture (soft)  
♦ 
Signify the meaning and importance of Strategic Leadership  
♦ 
Discuss the role of Strategic Control  
♦ 
Identify and Classify Strategic Performance Measures 
“Effective leadership is not about making speeches or being liked; leadership is 
defined by results not attributes”. 
-  Peter Drucker 
“A leader is one who knows the way, goes the way, and shows the way” 
- 
 John Maxwell 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 2>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.2 
 
 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
Strategy implementation and evaluation are critical phases of the process of 
strategic management in an organization. Implementation involves putting the 
plans and initiatives developed as part of the strategy into action, while evaluation 
refers to the process of measuring and assessing the effectiveness of these actions. 
In this chapter, we will explore various implementation and evaluation methods that 
organizations can use to assess the success of their strategy implementation and 
identify areas for improvement. This chapter will provide a comprehensive overview 
of the implementation and evaluation process and equip readers with the 
knowledge and skills needed to effectively execute and assess their organization's 
strategies. To begin with an overview of the process of strategic management is 
provided in the next section. 
CHAPTER OVERVIEW 
Strategy 
Implementation 
and Evaluation
Interrelationship 
between 
Strategy 
Formulation and  
Implementation
Strategic 
Change
through Digital 
Transformation 
Organisation 
Structure 
(hard) and 
Culture (soft)
Strategic 
Leadership
Strategic 
Control
Strategic 
Performance 
Measures
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 3>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.3 
5.2 STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT PROCESS 
The process of developing an organisation’s strategy is quite methodical. The 
organisation first develops a clear vision, mission, values and goals. They then must 
then discuss and analyse a number of themes to determine which options are most 
promising. All these aspects come together in a strategic plan that details the 
organisation’s vision, mission, values, goals, strategic themes, a high-level 
implementation plan and key performance measures. The key performance 
measures are included in the strategic plan and are used to link the themes back 
to the organisation’s goals and to measure the success of the strategy after it is 
implemented. 
The strategic management process is dynamic and continuous. A change in any 
one of the major components in the model can necessitate a change in any or all 
of the other components. For instance, a shift in the economy could represent a 
major opportunity and require a change in long-term objectives and strategies; a 
failure to accomplish annual objectives could require a change in policy; or a major 
competitor’s change in strategy could require a change in the firm’s mission.  
Therefore, strategy formulation, implementation, and evaluation activities should 
be performed on a continual basis, not just at the end of the year or semi-annually. 
The strategic management process never really ends. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure: Strategic Management Model (Fred R David) 
Environmental 
Analysis 
Develop Vision,  
Mission and  
Objectives 
Generate,  
Analyse and  
Select Strategies 
Implement 
Strategies 
Strategic  
Evaluation and 
Control 
Organisation 
Appraisal 
Formulation 
Implementation 
Evaluation 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 4>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.4 
The strategic management process can best be studied and applied using a model. 
Every model represents some kind of process. The model illustrated in the Figure: 
Strategic Management Model (Fred R David) is a widely accepted, comprehensive. 
This model like any other model of management does not guarantee sure-shot 
success, but it does represent a clear and practical approach for formulating, 
implementing, and evaluating strategies. Relationships among major components 
of the strategic management process are shown in the model. 
In practice, strategists do not go through the process in lockstep fashion. Generally, 
there is give-and-take among hierarchical levels of an organisation. The process 
essentially is iterative and involves a lot of back-and-forth considerations across 
different stages in the strategic management process. Many organisations conduct 
formal meetings semi-annually to discuss and update the firm’s vision/mission, 
opportunities/threats, strengths/weaknesses, strategies, objectives, policies, and 
performance. Creativity from participants is encouraged in meeting. Good 
communication and feedback are needed throughout the strategic management 
process. 
5.2.1 Stages in Strategic Management 
Crafting and executing strategy are the heart and soul of managing a business 
enterprise. But exactly what is involved in developing a strategy and executing it 
proficiently? And who besides top management has strategy – formulation – 
executing responsibility? 
Strategic management involves the following stages: 
1. 
Developing a strategic vision and formulation of statement of mission, goals 
and objectives. 
2. 
Environmental and organisational analysis. 
3. 
Formulation of strategy. 
4. 
Implementation of strategy. 
5. 
Strategic evaluation and control 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 5>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.5 
Stage 1: Strategic Vision, Mission and Objectives 
First a company must determine what directional path the company should take 
and what changes in the company’s product – market – customer – technology – 
focus would improve its current market position and its future prospect. Deciding 
to commit the company to one path versus other pushes managers to draw some 
carefully reasoned conclusions about how to try to modify the company’s business 
makeup and the market position it should carve out. Top management’s views and 
conclusions about the company’s direction and the product-customer-market-
technology focus constitute a strategic vision for the company. A strategic vision 
delineates management’s aspirations for the organisation and highlights a 
particular direction, or strategic path for it to follow in preparing for the future and 
molds its identity. A clearly articulated strategic vision communicates 
management’s aspirations to stakeholders and helps steer the energies of company 
personnel in a common direction.  
Mission and Strategic Intent: Managers need to be clear about what they see as the 
role of their organisation, and this is often expressed in terms of a statement of 
mission. This is important because both external stakeholders and other managers 
in the organisation need to be clear about what the organisation is seeking to 
achieve and, in broad terms, how it expects to do so. At this level, strategy is not 
concerned with the details of SBU competitive strategy or the directions and 
methods the businesses might take to achieve competitive advantage Rather, the 
concern here is overall strategic direction. 
Corporate goals and objectives flow from the mission and growth ambition of the 
corporation. Basically, they represent the quantum of growth the firm seeks to 
achieve in the given time frame. They also endow the firm with characteristics that 
ensure the projected growth. Through the objective setting process, the firm is 
tackling the environment and deciding the focus it should have in the environment. 
The objective provides the basis for major decisions of the firm and also help the 
organisational performance to be realized at each level. The managerial purpose of 
setting objectives is to convert the strategic vision into specific performance targets 
– basically the results and outcomes the management wants to achieve - and then 
use these objectives as yardsticks for tracking the company’s progress and 
performance.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 6>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.6 
Ideally, managers ought to use the objective-setting exercise as a tool for truly 
stretching an organisation to reach its full potential. Challenging company 
personnel to go all out and deliver big gains in performance pushes an enterprise 
to be more inventive, to exhibit some urgency in improving both its financial 
performance and its business position, and to be more intentional and focused in 
its actions.  
Objectives are needed at all organisational levels. Objective setting should not stop 
with top management’s establishing of companywide performance targets. 
Company objectives need to be broken down into performance targets for each 
separate business, product line, functional department, and individual work unit. 
Company performance can’t reach full potential unless each area of the 
organisation does its part and contributes directly to the desired companywide 
outcomes and results. This means setting performance targets for each 
organisation unit that support-rather than conflict with or negate-the achievement 
of companywide strategic and financial objectives. 
Stage 2: Environmental and Organisational Analysis  
This stage is the diagnostic phase of strategic analysis. It entails two types of 
analysis: 
1. 
Environmental scanning 
2. 
Organisational analysis 
The external environment of a firm consists of economic, social, technological, 
market and other forces which affect its functioning. The firm’s external 
environment is dynamic and uncertain. So, the management must systematically be 
analysed various elements of environment to determine opportunities and threats 
for the firm in future.  
Organisational analysis involved a review of financial resources, technological 
resources, productive capacity, marketing and distribution effectiveness, research 
and development, human resource skills and so on. This would reveal 
organisational strengths and weaknesses which could be matched with the threats 
and opportunities in the external environment. This would provide us a framework 
for SWOT analysis (Strength, Weakness, Opportunity and Threat) which could be in 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 7>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.7 
the form of a table highlighting various strengths and weaknesses of the firm and 
opportunities and threats which the environment we create for the firm. 
Stage 3: Formulating Strategy 
The first step in strategy formulation is developing strategic alternatives in the light 
of organisation strengths and weaknesses, and opportunities and threats in the 
environment. The second step is the deep analysis of various strategic alternatives 
for the purpose of choosing the most appropriate alternative which will serve as 
the strategy of the firm. 
A company may be confronted with several alternatives such as: 
i. 
Should the company continue in the same business carrying on the same 
volume of activities? 
ii. 
If it should continue in the same business, should it grow by expanding the 
existing units or by establishing new units or by acquiring other units in the 
industry? 
iii. 
If it should diversify, should it diversify into related areas or unrelated areas? 
iv. 
Should it get out of an existing business fully or partially? 
The above strategic alternatives may be designated as stability strategy, 
growth/expansion strategy and retrenchment strategy. A company may also follow 
a combination of these alternatives called combination strategy.  
Stage 4: Implementation of Strategy 
Implementation and execution are an operations-oriented activity aimed at 
shaping the performance of core business activities in a strategy-supportive 
manner. It is the most demanding and time-consuming part of the strategy-
management process. To convert strategic plans into actions and results, a 
manager must be able to direct organisational change, motivate people, build and 
strengthen company competencies and competitive capabilities, create a strategy-
supportive work climate, and meet or beat performance targets. 
In most situations, strategy-execution process includes the following principal 
aspects: 
♦ 
Developing budgets that steer ample resources into those activities critical to 
strategic success. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 8>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.8 
♦ 
Staffing the organisation with the needed skills and expertise, consciously 
building 
and 
strengthening 
strategy-supportive 
competencies 
and 
competitive capabilities and organising the work effort. 
♦ 
Ensuring that policies and operating procedures facilitate rather than impede 
effective execution. 
♦ 
Using the best-known practices to perform core business activities and 
pushing for continuous improvement.  
♦ 
Installing information and operating systems that enable company personnel 
to better carry out their strategic roles day in and day out. 
♦ 
Motivating people to pursue the target objectives energetically.  
♦ 
Creating a company culture and work climate conducive to successful 
strategy implementation and execution. 
♦ 
Exerting the internal leadership needed to drive implementation forward and 
keep improving strategy execution. When the organisation encounters 
stumbling blocks or weaknesses, management has to see that they are 
addressed and rectified quickly. 
Good strategy execution involves creating strong “fits” between strategy and 
organisational capabilities, between strategy and the reward structure, between 
strategy and internal operating systems, and between strategy and the 
organisation’s work climate and culture.  
Stage 5: Strategic Evaluation and Control 
The final stage of strategic management process – evaluating the company’s 
progress, assessing the impact of new external developments, and making 
corrective adjustments – is the trigger point for deciding whether to continue or 
change the company’s vision, objectives, strategy, and/or strategy-execution 
methods. So long as the company’s direction and strategy seem well matched to 
industry and competitive conditions and performance targets are being met, 
company executives may decide to stay the course. Simply fine-tuning the strategic 
plan and continuing with ongoing efforts to improve strategy execution are 
sufficient. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 9>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.9 
But whenever a company encounters disruptive changes in its external 
environment, questions need to be raised about the appropriateness of its direction 
and strategy. If a company experiences a downturn in its market position or 
shortfalls in performance, then company managers are obligated to ferret out 
whether the causes relate to poor strategy, poor execution, or both and then to 
take timely corrective action. A company’s direction, objectives, and strategy have 
to be revisited anytime external or internal conditions warrant. It is to be expected 
that a company will modify its strategic vision, direction, objectives, and strategy 
over time. 
Proficient strategy execution is always the product of much organisational learning. 
It is achieved unevenly – coming quickly in some areas and proving troublesome 
and problematic in others. Periodically assessing what aspects of strategy execution 
are working well and what needs improving is normal and desirable. Successful 
strategy execution entails vigilantly searching for ways or continuously improve and 
then making corrective adjustments whenever and wherever it is useful to do so. 
5.2.2 Strategy Formulation 
Corporate Strategy 
Planning entails choosing what has to be done in the future (today, next week, next 
month, next year, over the next couple of years, etc.) and creating action plans. An 
essential element of effective management is adequate planning. Choosing a path 
of action to achieve defined goals is a part of planning.  
The game plan that really directs the company towards success is called “corporate 
strategy”. Planning may be operational or strategic. Senior management develops 
strategic plans for the entire organisation after evaluating the organization's 
strengths and weaknesses in light of potential possibilities and dangers in the 
outside world. They involve gathering and allocating resources in order to achieve 
organisational goals. But operational plans on the other hand are made at the 
middle and lower-level management. They provide specifics on how the resources 
are to be used effectively to achieve the goals. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 10>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic Planning: The game plan that really directs the company towards success 
is called “corporate strategy”. The success of the company depends on how well 
this game plan works. Because of this, the core of the process of strategic planning 
is the formation of corporate strategy. The formation of corporate strategy is the 
result of a process known as strategic planning. 
♦ 
Strategic planning is the process of determining the objectives of the firm, 
resources required to attain these objectives and formulation of policies to 
govern the acquisition, use and disposition of resources.  
 
Corporate Strategy 
Strategic planning 
Operational planning 
Characteristics of 
Strategic planning 
Shapes the organisation and its 
resources. 
Assesses 
the 
impact 
of 
environmental variables. 
Takes a holistic view of the 
organisation. 
Develops overall objectives and 
strategies. 
Is concerned with the long-term 
success of the organisation. 
Is 
a 
senior 
management 
responsibility. 
Characteristics of 
Operational planning 
Deals with current deployment 
of resources. 
Develops tactics rather than 
strategy. 
Projects current operations into 
the future. 
Makes modifications to the 
business functions but not 
fundamental changes. 
Is 
the 
responsibility 
of 
functional managers. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 11>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.11 
♦ 
Strategic planning involves a fact of interactive and overlapping decisions 
leading to the development of an effective strategy for the firm.  
♦ 
Strategic planning determines where an organisation is going over the next 
year or more and the ways for going there.  
♦ 
The process is organisation-wide or focused on a major function such as a 
division or other major function. 
Strategic uncertainty and how to deal with it? 
Strategic uncertainty refers to the unpredictability and unpredictability of future 
events and circumstances that can impact an organization's strategy and goals. It 
can be driven by factors such as changes in the market, technology, competition, 
regulation, and other external factors. Dealing with strategic uncertainty can be 
challenging and organizations need to have the flexibility, resilience, and agility to 
quickly respond to changes in the environment and minimize its impact. To be 
manageable, they need to be grouped into logical clusters or themes. It is then 
useful to assess the importance of each cluster in order to set priorities with respect 
to Information gathering and analysis.  
♦ 
Flexibility: Organizations can build flexibility into their strategies to quickly 
adapt to changes in the environment. 
♦ 
Diversification: Diversifying the organization's product portfolio, markets, 
and customer base can reduce the impact of strategic uncertainty. 
♦ 
Monitoring and Scenario Planning: Organizations can regularly monitor 
key indicators of change and conduct scenario planning to understand how 
different future scenarios might impact their strategies. 
♦ 
Building Resilience: Organizations can invest in building internal resilience, 
such as strengthening their operational processes, increasing their financial 
flexibility, and improving their risk management capabilities. 
♦ 
Collaboration and Partnerships: Collaborating with other organizations, 
suppliers, customers, and partners can help organizations pool resources, 
share risk, and gain access to new markets and technologies. 
Impact of uncertainty: Each element of strategic uncertainty involves potential 
trends or events that could have an impact on present, proposed, and even 
potential businesses., a trend toward natural foods may present opportunities for 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 12>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.12 
juices for a firm producing aerated drinks on the basis of a strategic uncertainty. 
The impact of a strategic uncertainty will depend on the importance of the 
impacted SBU to a firm. Some SBUs are more important than others. The 
importance of established SBUs may be indicated by their associated sales, profits, 
or costs. However, such measures might need to be supplemented for potential 
growth as present sales, profits, or costs may not reflect the true value. 
5.2.3 Strategy Implementation 
Strategy implementation concerns the managerial exercise of putting a freshly 
chosen strategy into action. It deals with the managerial exercise of supervising the 
ongoing pursuit of strategy, making it work, improving the competence with which 
it is executed and showing measurable progress in achieving the targeted results. 
Strategic implementation is concerned with translating a strategic decision into 
action, which presupposes that the decision itself (i.e., the strategic choice) was 
made with some thought being given to feasibility and acceptability. The allocation 
of resources to new courses of action will need to be undertaken, and there may 
be a need for adapting the organization’s structure to handle new activities as well 
as training personnel and devising appropriate systems.  
Relationship with strategy formulation 
Many managers fail to distinguish between strategy formulation and strategy 
implementation. Yet, it is crucial to realize the difference between the two because 
they both require very different skills. Also, a company will be successful only when 
the strategy formulation is sound and implementation is excellent. There is no such 
thing as successful strategic design. This sounds obvious, but in practice the 
distinction is not always made. Often people, blame the strategy model for the 
failure of a company while the main flaw might lie in failed implementation. Thus, 
organizational success is a function of good strategy and proper implementation. 
The matrix in the figure below represents various combinations of strategy 
formulation and implementation: 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 13>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.13 
Strategy Formulation
Sound 
A 
B 
 
Flawed 
C 
D 
 
 
 
Weak 
Excellent 
 
Figure: Strategy formulation and implementation matrix 
The above-mentioned figure depicts the distinction between sound/flawed 
strategy formulation and excellent/ weak strategy implementation.  
Square A is the situation where a company apparently has formulated a very 
competitive strategy but is showing difficulties in implementing it successfully. This 
can be due to various factors, such as the lack of experience (e.g. for startups), the 
lack of resources, missing leadership and so on. In such a situation the company 
will aim at moving from square A to square B, given they realize their 
implementation difficulties. Square B is the ideal situation where a company has 
succeeded in designing a sound and competitive strategy and has been successful 
in implementing it. 
Square D is the situation where the strategy formulation is flawed, but the company 
is showing excellent implementation skills. When a company finds itself in square 
D the first thing, they have to do is to redesign their strategy before readjusting 
their implementation/execution skills. 
Square C is denotes for companies that haven’t succeeded in coming up with a 
sound strategy formulation and in addition are bad at implementing their flawed 
strategic model. Their path to success also goes through business model redesign 
and implementation/execution readjustment. 
Taken together all the elements of business strategy, it is to be seen as a chosen 
set of actions by means of which a market position relative to the competing 
enterprises is sought and maintained. This gives us the notion of competitive 
position. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 14>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.14 
It needs to be emphasized that ‘strategy’ is not synonymous with ‘long-term plan’ 
but rather consists of an enterprise’s attempts to reach some preferred future state 
by adapting its competitive position as circumstances change. While a series of 
strategic moves may be planned, competitors’ actions will mean that the actual 
moves will have to be modified to take account of those actions. 
In contrast to this view of strategy there is another approach to management 
practice, which has been followed in many organizations. In organizations that lack 
strategic direction there has been a tendency to look inwards in times of stress, and 
for management to devote their attention to cost cutting and to shedding 
unprofitable divisions. In other words, the focus has been on efficiency (i.e., the 
relationship between inputs and outputs, usually with a short time horizon) rather 
than on effectiveness (which is concerned with the attainment of organisational 
goals - including that of desired competitive position). While efficiency is essentially 
introspective, effectiveness highlights the links between the organization and its 
environment. The responsibility for efficiency lies with operational managers, with 
top management having the primary responsibility for the strategic orientation of 
the organization. 
Strategic Formulation 
Operational Management 
 
Effective 
Ineffective 
Efficient 
1 
Thrive 
2 
Die  
Slowly 
Inefficient 
3 
Survive 
4 
Die 
Quickly 
Figure: Principal combinations of efficiency and effectiveness 
An organization that finds itself in cell 1 is well placed and thrives, since it is 
achieving what it aspires to achieve with an efficient output/input ratio. In contrast, 
an organization in cell 2 or 4 is doomed, unless it can establish some strategic 
direction. The particular point to note is that cell 2 is a worse place to be than is 
cell 3 since, in the latter, the strategic direction is present to ensure effectiveness 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 15>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.15 
even if rather too much input is being used to generate outputs. To be effective is 
to survive whereas to be efficient is not in itself either necessary or sufficient for 
survival. 
In crude terms, to be effective is to do the right thing, while to be efficient is 
to do the thing right. An emphasis on efficiency rather than on effectiveness is 
clearly wrong. But who determines effectiveness? Any organization can be 
portrayed as a coalition of diverse interest groups each of which participates in the 
coalition in order to secure some advantage. This advantage (or inducement) may 
be in the form of dividends to shareholders, wages to employees, continued 
business to suppliers of goods and services, satisfaction on the part of consumers, 
legal compliance from the viewpoint of government, responsible behaviour 
towards society and the environment from the perspective of pressure groups, and 
so on. 
Even the most technically perfect strategic plan will serve little purpose if it is not 
implemented effectively. Many organizations tend to spend an inordinate amount 
of time, money, and effort on developing the strategic plan, treating the means and 
circumstances under which it will be implemented as afterthoughts. Change comes 
through implementation and evaluation, not through the plan. A technically 
imperfect plan that is implemented well will achieve more than the perfect plan 
that never gets off the paper on which it is typed. 
Successful strategy formulation does not guarantee successful strategy 
implementation. It is always more difficult to do something (strategy 
implementation) than to say you are going to do it (strategy formulation). 
5.2.4Difference 
between 
Strategy 
Formulation  
and Implementation 
Although inextricably linked, strategy implementation is fundamentally different 
from strategy formulation. Summarized are the key distinctions between strategy 
formulation and strategy implementation: 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 16>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.16 
Strategy Formulation Vs. Strategy Implementation 
Strategy Formulation 
Strategy Implementation 
Strategy 
Formulation 
includes 
planning 
and 
decision-making 
involved in developing organization’s 
strategic goals and plans. 
Strategy Implementation involves all 
those means related to executing the 
strategic plans. 
In 
short, 
Strategy 
Formulation 
is placing the Forces before the 
action. 
In 
short, 
Strategy 
Implementation 
is managing forces during the action. 
An Entrepreneurial Activity based 
on strategic decision-making. 
An 
Administrative 
Task based 
on 
strategic and operational decisions. 
Emphasizes on effectiveness. 
Emphasizes on efficiency. 
Primarily 
an 
intellectual 
and rational process. 
Primarily an operational process. 
Requires co-ordination among few 
individuals at the top level. 
Requires co-ordination among many 
individuals at the middle and lower 
levels. 
Requires a great deal of initiative, 
logical skills, conceptual intuitive 
and analytical skills. 
Requires 
specific motivational 
and 
leadership traits. 
Strategic 
Formulation 
precedes 
Strategy Implementation. 
Strategy 
Implementation 
follows 
Strategy Formulation. 
Strategy formulation concepts and tools do not differ greatly for small, large, for-
profit, or non-profit organizations. However, strategy implementation varies 
substantially among different types and sizes of organizations. Implementation of 
strategies requires such actions as altering sales territories, adding new 
departments, closing facilities, hiring new employees, changing an organization’s 
pricing strategy, developing financial budgets, developing new employee benefits, 
establishing cost-control procedures, changing advertising strategies, building new 
facilities, training new employees, transferring managers among divisions, and 
building a better management information system. These types of activities 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 17>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.17 
obviously differ greatly among manufacturing, service, and governmental 
organizations. 
It is to be noted that the division of strategic management into different phases is 
only for the purpose of orderly study. In real life, the formulation and 
implementation processes are intertwined. Two types of linkages exist between 
these two phases of strategic management. The forward linkages deal with the 
impact of strategy formulation on strategy implementation while the backward 
linkages are concerned with the impact in the opposite direction. 
5.2.5 Linkages and Issues in Strategy Implementation 
Linkages 
Noteworthy is the fact that while strategy formulation is primarily an 
entrepreneurial activity, based on strategic decision-making, the implementation 
of strategy is mainly an administrative task based on strategic as well as operational 
decision-making. 
♦ 
Forward Linkages: The different elements in strategy formulation starting 
with objective setting through environmental and organizational appraisal, 
strategic alternatives and choice to the strategic plan determine the course 
that an organization adopts for itself. With the formulation of new strategies, 
or reformulation of existing strategies, many changes have to be affected 
within the organization. For instance, the organizational structure has to 
undergo a change in the light of the requirements of the modified or new 
strategy. The style of leadership has to be adapted to the needs of the 
modified or new strategies. In this way, the formulation of strategies has 
forward linkages with their implementation. 
♦ 
Backward Linkages: Just as implementation is determined by the 
formulation of strategies, the formulation process is also affected by factors 
related with implementation. While dealing with strategic choice, remember 
that past strategic actions also determine the choice of strategy. 
Organizations tend to adopt those strategies which can be implemented with 
the help of the present structure of resources combined with some additional 
efforts. Such incremental changes, over a period of time, take the 
organization from where it is to where it wishes to be. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 18>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.18 
Issues in Strategy Implementation 
This section focuses on the various issues involved in the implementation of 
strategies. The different issues involved in strategy implementation cover 
practically everything that is included in the discipline of management studies. A 
strategist, therefore, has to bring a wide range of knowledge, skills, attitudes, and 
abilities. The implementation tasks put to test the strategists’ abilities to allocate 
resources, design organisational structure, formulate functional policies, and to 
provide strategic leadership.  
♦ 
The strategic plan devised by the organization proposes the manner in which 
the strategies could be put into action. Strategies, by themselves, do not lead 
to action. They are, in a sense, a statement of intent. Implementation tasks 
are meant to realise the intent. Strategies, therefore, have to be activated 
through implementation. 
♦ 
Strategies should lead to formulation of different kinds of programmes. A 
programme is a broad term, which includes goals, policies, procedures, rules, 
and steps to be taken in putting a plan into action. Programmes are usually 
supported by funds allocated for plan implementation.  
♦ 
Programmes lead to the formulation of projects. A project is a highly specific 
programme for which the time schedule and costs are predetermined. It 
requires allocation of funds based on capital budgeting by organizations. 
Thus, research and development programme may consist of several projects, 
each of which is intended to achieve a specific and limited objective, requires 
separate allocation of funds, and is to be completed within a set time 
schedule. 
Implementation of strategies is not limited to formulation of plans, programmes, 
and projects. Projects would also require resources. After resources have been 
provided, it would be essential to see that a proper organizational structure is 
designed, systems are installed, functional policies are devised, and various 
behavioural inputs are provided so that plans may work. 
Given below in sequential manner the issues in strategy implementation which are 
to be considered: 
♦ 
Project implementation 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 19>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.19 
♦ 
Procedural implementation 
♦ 
Resource allocation 
♦ 
Structural implementation  
♦ 
Functional implementation  
♦ 
Behavioural implementation  
It should be noted that the sequence does not mean that each of the above 
activities are necessarily performed one after another. Many activities can be 
performed simultaneously, certain other activities may be repeated over time; and 
there are activities, which are performed only once. Thus, there can be overlapping 
and changes in the order in which these activities are performed. 
In all but the smallest organizations, the transition from strategy formulation to 
strategy implementation requires a shift in responsibility from strategists to 
divisional and functional managers. Implementation problems can arise because of 
this shift in responsibility, especially if strategic decisions come as a surprise to 
middle and lower-level managers. Managers and employees are motivated more 
by perceived self-interests than by organizational interests, unless the two coincide. 
Therefore, it is essential that divisional and functional managers be involved as 
much as possible in the strategy-formulation process. similarly, strategists should 
also be involved as much as possible in strategy-implementation activities. 
Management issues central to strategy implementation include establishing annual 
objectives, 
devising 
policies, 
allocating 
resources, 
altering 
an 
existing 
organizational structure, restructuring and reengineering, revising reward and 
incentive plans, minimizing resistance to change, developing a strategy-supportive 
culture, adapting production/operations processes, developing an effective human 
resource system and, if necessary, downsizing. Management changes are 
necessarily more extensive when strategies to be implemented move a firm in a 
new direction. 
Managers and employees throughout an organization should participate early and 
directly in strategy-implementation activities. Their role in strategy implementation 
should build upon prior involvement in strategy-formulation activities. Strategists’ 
genuine personal commitment to implementation is a necessary and powerful 
motivational force for managers and employees. Too often, strategists are too busy 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 20>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.20 
to actively support strategy-implementation efforts, and their lack of interest can 
be detrimental to organizational success. The rationale for objectives and strategies 
should be understood clearly throughout the organization. Major competitors’ 
accomplishments, products, plans, actions, and performance should be apparent to 
all organizational members. Major external opportunities and threats should be 
clear, and managers and employees’ questions should be answered satisfactorily. 
Top-down flow of communication is essential for developing bottom-up support. 
Firms need to develop a competitor focus on all hierarchical levels by gathering 
and widely distributing competitive intelligence; every employee should be able to 
benchmark her or his efforts against best-in-class competitors so that the challenge 
becomes personal. This is a challenge for strategists of the firm. Firms should 
provide training for both managers and employees to ensure that they have and 
maintain the skills necessary to be world-class performers. 
5.3 STRATEGIC CHANGE THROUGH DIGITAL 
 
TRANSFORMATION 
Organizations are being pushed harder than ever to shift digitally in order to stay 
competitive. Digital transformation, however, may be a difficult and complicated 
process. To guarantee that projects for digital transformation are effective, change 
management is crucial. We will now examine change management's function in the 
digital transformation. 
5.3.1 Strategic Change 
The changes in the environmental forces often require businesses to make 
modifications in their existing strategies and bring out new strategies. Strategic 
change is a complex process that involves a corporate strategy focused on new 
markets, products, services and new ways of doing business. 
Steps to initiate strategic change: For initiating strategic change, three steps can 
be identified as under: 
(i) 
Recognize the need for change: The first step is to diagnose which facets of 
the present corporate culture are strategy supportive and which are not. This 
basically means going for environmental scanning involving appraisal of both 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 21>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.21 
internal and external capabilities may be through SWOT analysis and then 
determining where the lacuna lies and scope for change exists. 
(ii) 
Create a shared vision to manage change: Objectives of both individuals 
and organization should coincide. There should be no conflict between them. 
This is possible only if the management and the organization members follow 
a shared vision. Senior managers need to constantly and consistently 
communicate the vision to all the organizational members. They have to 
convince all those concerned that the change in business culture is not 
superficial or cosmetic. The actions taken have to be credible, highly visible 
and unmistakably indicative of management’s seriousness to new strategic 
initiatives and associated changes.   
(iii) 
Institutionalise the change: This is basically an action stage which requires 
implementation of changed strategy. Creating and sustaining a different 
attitude towards change is essential to ensure that the firm does not slip back 
into old ways of thinking or doing things. Capacity for self-renewal should be 
a fundamental anchor of the new culture of the firm. Besides, change process 
must be regularly monitored and reviewed to analyse the after-effects of 
change. Any discrepancy or deviation should be brought to the notice of 
persons concerned so that the necessary corrective actions are taken. It takes 
time for the changed culture to prevail. 
Kurt Lewin’s Model of Change: To make the change lasting, Kurt Lewin proposed 
three phases of the change process for moving the organization from the present 
to the future. These stages are unfreezing, changing and refreezing. 
(a) 
Unfreezing the situation: The process of unfreezing simply makes the 
individuals aware of the necessity for change and prepares them for such a 
change. Lewin proposes that the changes should not come as a surprise to the 
members of the organization. Sudden and unannounced change would be 
socially destructive and morale lowering. The management must pave the way 
for the change by first “unfreezing the situation”, so that members would be 
willing and ready to accept the change. 
 
Unfreezing is the process of breaking down the old attitudes and behaviours, 
customs and traditions so that they start with a clean slate. This can be 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 22>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.22 
achieved by making announcements, holding meetings and promoting the 
new ideas throughout the organization.  
(b) 
Changing to the new situation: Once the unfreezing process has been 
completed and the members of the organization recognise the need for 
change and have been fully prepared to accept such change, their behaviour 
patterns need to be redefined. H.C. Kellman has proposed three methods for 
reassigning new patterns of behaviour. These are compliance, identification 
and internalization.  
● 
Compliance: It is achieved by strictly enforcing the reward and 
punishment strategy for good or bad behaviour. Fear of punishment, 
actual punishment or actual reward seems to change behaviour for the 
better. 
● 
Identification: Identification occurs when members are psychologically 
impressed upon to identify themselves with some given role models 
whose behaviour they would like to adopt and try to become like them. 
● 
Internalization: Internalization involves some internal changing of the 
individual’s thought processes in order to adjust to the changes 
introduced. They have given freedom to learn and adopt new behaviour 
in order to succeed in the new set of circumstances. 
(c) 
Refreezing: Refreezing occurs when the new behaviour becomes a normal 
way of life. The new behaviour must replace the former behaviour completely 
for successful and permanent change to take place. In order for the new 
behaviour to become permanent, it must be continuously reinforced so that 
this new acquired behaviour does not diminish or extinguish. 
 
Change process is not a one-time application but a continuous process due 
to dynamism and ever changing environment. The process of unfreezing, 
changing and refreezing is a cyclical one and remains continuously in action. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 23>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.23 
5.3.2 How does digital transformation work? 
The use of digital technologies to develop fresh, improved, or entirely new 
company procedures, goods, or services is known as "digital transformation." It's a 
fundamental adjustment that can be challenging to identify and even more 
challenging to implement.  
Change management enters into the picture here. Organizations can plan, prepare 
for, and carry out changes to their operations, including digital transformations, 
with the aid of the discipline of change management. When implemented correctly, 
change management may assist firms in overcoming the obstacles posed by the 
digital transition and reaping the full rewards of their investment.  
But how does change management appear when applied to digital transformation? 
Change management in the digital transition consists of four essential elements: 
1. 
Defining the goals and objectives of the transformation 
2. 
Assessing the current state of the organization and identifying gaps 
3. 
Creating a roadmap for change that outlines the steps needed to reach the 
desired state 
4. 
Implementing and managing the change at every level of the organization 
To navigate a digital transformation successfully, each of these elements is 
necessary. But what matters most is how they collaborate to support organisations 
in achieving their goals. 
How does change management work? 
Change management is a process or set of tools and best practices used to manage 
changes in an organization. It assists in making changes in a safe and regulated 
manner, reducing the possibility of detrimental effects on the company. Any sort 
of organisation, including enterprises, organisations, governmental bodies, and 
even families, can utilise change management to manage changes. 
Change management models and methods come in a wide variety, but they all have 
key things in common. These include creating a clear vision for the change, 
involving stakeholders in the process, coming up with a plan for putting the change 
into action, and keeping an eye on the results. Although change management is 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 24>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.24 
frequently viewed as a difficult and complicated process, it is vital for ensuring that 
digital transformation projects are successful. 
The role of change management in digital transformation 
Digital transformation is a process of organizational change that enables an 
organization to use technology to create new value for customers, employees, and 
other stakeholders. A good change management strategy is necessary for a 
successful digital transformation.  
Change management is the process of planning, implementing, and monitoring 
changes in an organization. It provides organizations in achieving their objectives 
while reducing risks and disruptions. For any organisation undergoing a digital 
transition, change management is crucial.  
A properly implemented change management strategy can help an organization 
to: 
♦ 
Specify the parameters and goals of the digital transformation 
♦ 
Determine which procedures and tools need to be modified. 
♦ 
Make a plan for implementing the improvements. 
♦ 
Involve staff members and parties involved in the transformation process. 
♦ 
Track progress and make required course corrections 
A crucial component of any digital transition is change management. Why it gains 
more importance in the current times is because organizations can improve their 
chances of success by approaching change in a proactive and organized manner. 
5.3.3Change 
Management 
Strategies 
for 
Digital 
Transformation 
One of the most important area of focus for guaranteeing a successful 
transformation is change management. Businesses nowadays increasingly find 
themselves responsible for managing more than simply their staff, clients, and 
products. Additionally, they are handling the introduction of new technology, the 
unexpected emergence of new market opportunities, and changes in customer 
preferences regarding the brands they choose, interact with, and hold to. In 
essence, modern firms must be able to manage change. They must modify their 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 25>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.25 
management techniques in order to achieve this. The five best practices for 
managing change in small and medium-sized businesses are: 
1. 
Begin at the top: A focused, invested, united leadership that is on the same 
page about the company's future is reflected in change that begins at the top. 
The culture that will motivate the rest of the organisation to accept change 
can only be generated and promoted in this way. 
2. 
Ensure that the change is both necessary and desired: The fact that 
decision-makers are unaware of how to properly handle a digital 
transformation and the effects it will have on their firm is one of the main 
causes of this. If a corporation doesn’t have a sound strategy in place, 
introducing too much too fast can frequently become a major issue down the 
road. 
3. 
Reduce disruption: Employee perceptions of what is required or desirable 
change can differ by department, rank, or performance history. It's crucial to 
lessen how changes affect staff. The introduction of new tactics or 
technologies intended to improve management and corporate operations 
causes employee concern about change. It is possible to reduce workplace 
disruption by: 
a. 
Getting the word out early and preparing for some interruption. 
b. 
Giving staff members the knowledge and tools, they need to adjust to 
change. 
c. 
Creating an environment that encourages transformation or change. 
d. 
Empowering change agents to provide context and clarity for changes, 
such as project managers or team leaders. 
e. 
Ensuring that IT department is informed of changes in technology or 
infrastructure and is prepared to support them. 
4. 
Encourage communication: Create channels so that workers may contact you 
with queries or complaints. Encourage departmental collaboration to 
propagate 
ideas 
and 
innovations 
as 
new 
procedures 
take 
root. 
Communication promotes efficiency and has the power to influence culture, 
just like your vision. The people who will be affected the most by these 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 26>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.26 
changes are reassured that they are not in danger through effective 
communication, which keeps everyone on the same page. 
5. 
Recognize that change is the norm, not the exception: Change readiness 
may be defined as “the ability to continuously initiate and respond to change 
in ways that create advantage, minimize risk, and sustain performance.” In 
order to keep up with the customers, businesses must also adapt their 
operations. They must prepare for change in advance and expect them. It may 
run into difficulties because change is not a project but rather an ongoing 
process. 
5.3.4How 
to 
manage 
change 
during 
digital 
transformation? 
Any organisation may find the work of digital transformation challenging and 
overwhelming. To ensure that a digital transition is effective, change management 
is essential. Here are some pointers for navigating change during the digital 
transformation: 
1. 
Specify the digital transformation’s aims and objectives: What is the 
intended outcome? What are the precise objectives that must be 
accomplished? It will be easier to make sure that everyone is on the same page 
and pursuing the same aims if everyone has a clear grasp of the goals. 
2. 
Always, always, always communicate: It might be challenging for people to 
accept change and adjust to it. Ensure that you routinely and honestly discuss 
the objectives of the digital transformation and how they will affect 
stakeholders, including employees, clients, and other parties. 
3. 
Be ready for resistance: Even when a change is for the better, it can be 
challenging for people to embrace it. Have a strategy in place for dealing with 
any resistance that may arise. 
4. 
Implement changes gradually: Changes should ideally be implemented 
gradually rather than all at once. In order to avoid overwhelming individuals 
with too much change at once, this will give people time to become used to 
the new way of doing things. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 27>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.27 
5. 
Offer assistance and training: Workers will need guidance in the new 
procedures, software applications, etc. 
In conclusion, effective completion of the massive project known as digital 
transformation depends on meticulous planning and change management. Digital 
transformation efforts are more likely to fail without change management. 
Organizations can successfully integrate a new digital system by planning for and 
managing the changes that must take place. Any project involving digital 
transformation must include it. 
5.4 ORGRANISATIONAL FRAMEWORK 
The McKinsey 7S Model refers to a tool that analyzes a company’s “organizational 
design.” The goal of the model is to depict how effectiveness can be achieved in an 
organization through the interactions of hard and soft elements. The McKinsey 7s 
Model focuses on how the "Soft Ss" and "Hard Ss" elements are interrelated, 
suggesting that modifying one aspect might have a ripple effect on the other 
elements in order to maintain an effective balance. 
 
Hard elements are: 
Strategy: What steps does the company 
intend to take to address current and futures 
challenges? 
Structure: How is work divided, how do 
different departments work and collaborate? 
Systems: 
Which 
formal 
and 
informal 
processes is the company’s structure based 
on? 
Soft elements are: 
Shared Values: What is the idea the 
organization subscribes to? Is this idea 
communicated credibly to others? 
Staff: This elements refers to employees 
development 
and 
relevant 
processes, 
performances and feedback programs etc. 
Skill: What is the company’s base of skills and 
competencies? 
Style: This depicts the leadership style and 
how it influences the strategic decisions of the 
organization. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 28>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.28 
The Hard elements are directly controlled by the management. The following 
elements are the hard elements in an organization: 
♦ 
Strategy: the direction of the organization, a blueprint to build on a core 
competency and achieve competitive advantage to drive margins and lead 
the industry. 
♦ 
Structure: depending on the availability of resources and the degree of 
centralisation or decentralization that the management desires, it choses 
from the available alternatives of organizational structures. 
♦ 
Systems: the development of daily tasks, operations and teams to execute 
the goals and objectives in the most efficient and effective manner. 
The Soft elements are difficult to define as they are more governed by the culture. 
But these soft elements are equally important in determining an organization’s 
success as well as growth in the industry. The following are the soft elements in this 
model; 
♦ 
Shared Values: The core values which get reflected within the organizational 
culture or influence the code of ethics of the management. 
♦ 
Style: This depicts the leadership style and how it influences the strategic 
decisions of the organisation. It also revolves around people motivation and 
organizational delivery of goals. 
♦ 
Staff: The talent pool of the organisation. 
♦ 
Skills: The core competencies or the key skills of the employees play a vital 
role in defining the organizational success. 
While the McKinsey 7S Model provides a structural approach to analyzing 
organizational effectiveness, it has certain limitations:  
♦ 
It ignores the importance of the external environment and depicts only the 
most crucial elements within the organization. 
♦ 
The model does not clearly explain the concept of organizational 
effectiveness or performance. 
♦ 
The model is considered to be more static and less flexible for decision 
making. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 29>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.29 
♦ 
It is generally criticized for missing out the real gaps in conceptualization and 
execution of strategy. 
5.4.1 Organization Structure 
The ideal organizational structure is a place where ideas filter up as well as down, 
where the merit of ideas carries more weight than their source, and where 
participation and shared objectives are valued more than executive order. 
 
– Edson Spencer 
Changes in corporate strategy often require changes in the way an organization is 
structured for two major reasons. First, structure largely dictates how operational 
objectives and policies will be established to achieve the strategic objectives. For 
example, objectives and policies established under a geographic organizational 
structure are couched in geographic terms. Objectives and policies are stated largely 
in terms of products in an organization whose structure is based on product groups. 
The structural format for developing objectives and policies can significantly impact 
all other strategy-implementation activities. 
The second major reason why changes in strategy often require changes in 
structure is that structure dictates how resources will be allocated to achieve 
strategic objectives. If an organization’s structure is based on customer groups, 
then resources will be allocated in that manner. Similarly, if an organization’s 
structure is set up along functional business lines, then resources are allocated by 
functional areas.  
According to Chandler, changes in strategy lead to changes in organizational 
structure. Structure should be designed or redesigned to facilitate the strategic 
pursuit of a firm and, therefore, structure should follow strategy. Chandler found a 
particular structure sequence to be often repeated as organizations grow and 
change strategy over time. There is no one optimal organizational design or 
structure for a given strategy. What is appropriate for one organization may not be 
appropriate for a similar firm, although successful firms in a given industry do tend 
to organize themselves in a similar way. For example, consumer goods companies 
tend to emulate the divisional structure-by-product form of organization. Small firms 
tend to be functionally structured (centralized). Medium-size firms tend to be 
divisionally structured (decentralized). Large firms tend to use an SBU (strategic 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 30>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.30 
business unit) or matrix structure. As organizations grow, their structures generally 
change from simple to complex as a result of linking together of several basic 
strategies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure:  Chandler’s Strategy-Structure Relationship 
Every firm is influenced by numerous external and internal forces. But no firm can 
change its structure in response to each of these forces, because to do so would 
lead to chaos. However, when a firm changes its strategy, the existing 
organizational structure may become ineffective. Symptoms of an ineffective 
organizational structure include too many levels of management, too many 
meetings attended by too many people, too much attention being directed toward 
solving interdepartmental conflicts, too large a span of control, and too many 
unachieved objectives. Changes in organisational structure can facilitate strategy-
implementation efforts, but changes in structure should not be expected to make 
a bad strategy good, to make bad managers good, or to make bad products sell. 
Structure can also influence strategy. If a proposed strategy required massive 
structural changes, it would not be an attractive choice. In this way, structure can 
shape the choice of strategy. But a more important concern is determining what 
types of structural changes are needed to implement new strategies and how these 
changes can best be accomplished. We will examine this issue by focusing on the 
New strategy is 
formed 
New 
administrative 
problems emerge 
Organizational 
performance 
improves 
A new organizational 
structure is established 
Organizational 
performance 
declines 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 31>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.31 
following basic types of organizational structure: functional, divisional by 
geographic area, divisional by product, divisional by customer, divisional process, 
strategic business unit (SBU), and matrix. 
In order to implement and manage strategies that have been formulated, all 
companies need some form of organizational structure. And, as companies 
formulate new strategies, increase in size, or change their level of diversification, 
new organizational structures may be required. 
Types of Organization Structure 
Organizational structure is the company’s formal configuration of its intended 
roles, procedures, governance mechanisms, authority, and decision-making 
processes. Organizational structure, influenced by factors such as an organization’s 
age and size, acts as a framework which reflects managers’ determination of what 
a company does and how tasks are completed, given the chosen strategy. The most 
important issue is that the company’s structure must be congruent with or fit with 
the company’s strategy. 
A 
Simple Structure 
Simple organizational structure is most appropriate for companies that follow a 
single-business strategy and offer a line of products in a single geographic market. 
The simple structure also is appropriate for companies implementing focused cost 
leadership or focused differentiation strategies. A simple structure is an 
organizational form in which the owner-manager makes all major decisions directly 
and monitors all activities, while the company’s staff merely serves as an executor. 
Little specialization of tasks, few rules, little formalization, unsophisticated 
information systems and direct involvement of owner-manager in all phases of day-
to-day operations characterise the simple structure. In the simple structure, 
communication is frequent and direct, and new products tend to be introduced to 
the market quickly, which can result in a competitive advantage. Because of these 
characteristics, few of the coordination problems that are common in larger 
organizations exist. 
A simple organizational structure may result in competitive advantages for some 
small companies relative to their larger counterparts. These potential competitive 
advantages include a broad-based openness to innovation, greater structural 
flexibility, and an ability to respond more rapidly to environmental changes. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 32>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.32 
However, if they are successful, small companies grow larger. As a result of this 
growth, the company outgrows the simple structure. Generally, there are significant 
increases in the amount of competitively relevant information that requires 
processing. More extensive and complicated information-processing requirements 
place significant pressures on owner-managers (often due to a lack of 
organizational skills or experience or simply due to lack of time). 
Thus, it is incumbent on the company’s managers to recognise the inadequacies or 
inefficiencies of the simple structure and change it to one that is more consistent 
with company’s strategy. 
To coordinate more complex organizational functions, companies should abandon 
the simple structure in favour of the functional structure. The functional structure 
is used by larger companies and by companies with low levels of diversification. 
B 
Functional Structure 
A widely used structure in business organisations is functional type because of its 
simplicity and low cost. A functional structure groups tasks and activities by 
business function, such as production/operations, marketing, finance/accounting, 
research and development, and management information systems. Besides being 
simple and inexpensive, a functional structure also promotes specialization of 
labour, encourages efficiency, minimizes the need for an elaborate control system, 
and allows rapid decision making. 
 
Figure:  Functional Structure 
The functional structure consists of a chief executive officer or a managing director 
and supported by corporate staff with functional line managers in dominant 
functions such as production, financial accounting, marketing, R&D, engineering, 
Chief Executive Officer
Corporate 
R&D
Corporate 
Finance
Strategic 
Planning
Finance
Production
Engineering
Accounting
Sales & 
Marketing
Human 
Resource
Corporate 
Marketing 
Corporate 
Human
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 33>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.33 
and human resources. The functional structure enables the company to overcome 
the growth-related constraints of the simple structure, enabling or facilitating 
communication and coordination. 
However, compared to the simple structure, there also are some potential 
problems. Differences in functional specialization and orientation may impede 
communications and coordination. Thus, the chief executive officer must integrate 
functional decision-making and coordinate actions of the overall business across 
functions. Functional specialists often may develop a myopic (or narrow) 
perspective, losing sight of the company’s strategic vision and mission. When this 
happens, this problem can be overcome by implementing the multidivisional 
structure. 
C 
Divisional Structure 
As a firm, grows year after year it faces difficulty in managing different products 
and services in different markets. Some form of divisional structure generally 
becomes necessary to motivate employees, control operations, and compete 
successfully in diverse locations. The divisional structure can be organized in one 
of the four ways: by geographic area, by product or service, by customer, or by 
process. With a divisional structure, functional activities are performed both 
centrally and in each division separately. 
 
Figure: Divisional Structure 
Chief Executive
General Manager Division A
Marketing
Production
Personnel
General Manager Division B
Marketing
Production
Personnel
Corporate Finance
Corporate Legal/PR
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 34>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.34 
A divisional structure has some clear advantages. First and the foremost, 
accountability is clear. That is, divisional managers can be held responsible for sales 
and profit levels. Because a divisional structure is based on extensive delegation of 
authority, managers and employees can easily see the results of their good or bad 
performances. As a result, employee morale is generally higher in a divisional 
structure than it is in centralized structure. Other advantages of the divisional 
design are that it creates career development opportunities for managers, allows 
local control of local situations, leads to a competitive climate within an 
organization, and allows new businesses and products in be added easily. 
The divisional design is not without some limitations. Perhaps the most important 
limitation is that a divisional structure is costly, for a number of reasons. First, each 
division requires functional specialists who must be paid. Second, there exists some 
duplication of staff services, facilities, and personnel; for instance, functional 
specialists are also needed centrally (at headquarters) to coordinate divisional 
activities. Third, managers must be well qualified because the divisional design 
forces delegation of authority better-qualified individuals requires higher salaries. 
A divisional structure can also be costly because it requires an elaborate, 
headquarters-driven control system. Finally, certain regions, products, or customers 
may sometimes receive special treatment, and It may be difficult to maintain 
consistent, companywide practices. Nonetheless, for most large organizations and 
many small firms, the advantages of a divisional structure more than offset the 
potential limitations. 
A divisional structure by geographic area is appropriate for organizations whose 
strategies are formulated to fit the particular needs and characteristics of customers 
in different geographic areas. This type of structure can be most appropriate for 
organizations that have similar branch facilities located in widely dispersed areas. 
A divisional structure by geographic area allows local participation in decision 
making and improved coordination within a region. 
The divisional structure by product (or services) is most effective for implementing 
strategies when specific products or services need special emphasis. Also, this type 
of structure is widely used when an organization offers only a few products or 
services, when an organization’s products or services differ substantially. The 
divisional structure allows strict control over and attention to product lines, but it 
may also require a more skilled management force and reduced top management 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 35>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.35 
control. For example, General Motors, DuPont, and Procter & Gamble use a 
divisional structure by product to implement strategies.  
When a few major customers are of paramount importance and many different 
services are provided to these customers, then a divisional structure by customer 
can be the most effective way to implement strategies. This structure allows an 
organization to cater effectively to the requirements of clearly defined customer 
groups. For example, book-publishing companies often organize their activities 
around customer groups such as colleges, secondary schools, and private commercial 
schools. Some airline companies have two major customer divisions: passengers and 
freight or cargo services. Bulks are often organised in divisions such as personal 
banking corporate banking, etc. 
A divisional structure by process is similar to a functional structure, because 
activities are organized according to the way work is actually performed. However, 
a key difference between these two designs is that functional departments are not 
accountable for profits or revenues, whereas divisional process departments are 
evaluated on these criteria.  
D 
Multi Divisional Structure 
Multidivisional (M-form) structure is composed of operating divisions where each 
division represents a separate business to which the top corporate officer delegates 
responsibility for day-to-day operations and business unit strategy to division 
managers. By such delegation, the corporate office is responsible for formulating 
and implementing overall corporate strategy and manages divisions through 
strategic and financial controls. 
Multidivisional or M-form structure was developed in the 1920s, in response to 
coordination- and control-related problems in large firms. Functional departments 
often had difficulty dealing with distinct product lines and markets, especially in 
coordinating conflicting priorities among the products. Costs were not allocated to 
individual products, so it was not possible to assess an individual product’s profit 
contribution. Loss of control meant that optimal allocation of firm resources 
between products was difficult (if not impossible). Top managers became over-
involved in solving short-run problems (such as coordination, communications, 
conflict resolution) and neglected long-term strategic issues. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 36>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.36 
Multidivisional structure calls for: 
♦ 
Creating separate divisions, each representing a distinct business 
♦ 
Each division would house its functional hierarchy; 
♦ 
Division managers would be given responsibility for managing day-to-day 
operations; 
♦ 
A small corporate office that would determine the long-term strategic 
direction of the firm and exercise overall financial control over the semi-
autonomous divisions. 
This would enable the firm to more accurately monitor the performance of 
individual businesses, simplifying control problems, facilitate comparisons between 
divisions, improving the allocation of resources and stimulate managers of poorly 
performing divisions to seek ways to improve performance. 
When the firm is less diversified, strategic controls are used to manage divisions. 
Strategic control refers to the operational understanding by corporate officers of 
the strategies being implemented within the firm’s separate business units. 
An increase in diversification strains corporate officers’ abilities to understand the 
operations of all of its business units and divisions are then managed by financial 
controls, which enable corporate officers to manage the cash flow of the divisions 
through budgets and an emphasis on profits from distinct businesses. 
However, because financial controls are focused on financial outcomes, they 
require that each division’s performance be largely independent of the 
performance of other divisions. So, the Strategic Business Units come into picture. 
E 
Strategic Business Unit (SBU) Structure 
This concept is relevant to multi-product, multi-business enterprises. It is 
impractical for an enterprise with a multitude of businesses to provide separate 
strategic planning treatment to each one of its products/businesses; it has to 
necessarily group the products/businesses into a manageable number of 
strategically related business units and then take them up for strategic planning. 
The question is: what is the best way of grouping the products/businesses of such 
large enterprises? 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 37>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.37 
An SBU is a grouping of related businesses, which is amenable to composite 
planning treatment. As per this concept, a multi-business enterprise groups its 
multitude of businesses into a few distinct business units in a scientific way. The 
purpose is to provide effective strategic planning treatment to each one of its 
products/businesses. 
The three most important characteristics of a SBU are: 
♦ 
It is a single business or a collection of related businesses which offer scope 
for independent planning and which might feasibly standalone from the rest 
of the organization. 
♦ 
It has its own set of competitors. 
♦ 
It has a manager who has responsibility for strategic planning and profit 
performance, and who has control of profit-influencing factors. 
Historically, large, multi-business firms were handling business planning on a 
territorial basis since their structure was territorial. And in many cases, such a 
structure was the outcome of a manufacturing or distribution logistics. Often, the 
territorial structure did not suit the purpose of strategic planning. 
When strategic planning was carried out treating territories as the units for 
planning, it gave rise to two kinds of difficulties: (i) since a number of territorial 
units handled the same product, the same product was getting varied strategic 
planning treatments; and (ii) since a given territorial planning unit carried different 
and unrelated products, products with dissimilar characteristics were getting 
identical strategic planning treatment. 
The concept of strategic business units (SBU) breaks away from this practice. It 
recognises that just because a firm is structured into a number of territorial units, 
say six units, it is not necessarily in six different businesses. It may be engaged in 
only three distinct businesses. It is also possible that it is engaged in more than six 
businesses. The endeavour should be to group the businesses into an appropriate 
number of strategic business units before the firm takes up the strategy formulation 
task. 
The SBU structure is composed of operating units where each unit represents a 
separate business to which the top corporate officer delegates responsibility for 
day-to-day operations and business unit strategy to its managers. By such 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 38>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.38 
delegation, the corporate office is responsible for formulating and implementing 
overall corporate strategy and manages SBUs through strategic and financial 
controls. Hence, the SBU structure groups similar products into strategic business 
units and delegates authority and responsibility for each unit to a senior executive 
who reports directly to the chief executive officer. This change in structure can 
facilitate strategy implementation by improving coordination between similar 
divisions and channelling accountability to distinct business units. 
 
Figure:  SBU Structure 
A strategic business unit (SBU) structure consists of at least three levels, with a 
corporate headquarters at the top, SBU groups at the second level, and divisions 
grouped by relatedness within each SBU at the third level. 
This enables the company to more accurately monitor the performance of 
individual businesses, simplifying control problems. It also facilitates comparisons 
between divisions, improving the allocation of resources and can be used to 
stimulate managers of poorly performing divisions to seek ways to improve 
performance. 
This means that, within each SBU, divisions are related to each other, as also that 
SBU groups are unrelated to each other. Within each SBU, divisions producing 
similar products and/or using similar technologies can be organised to achieve 
synergy. Individual SBUs are treated as profit centres and controlled by corporate 
headquarters that can concentrate on strategic planning rather than operational 
President
Corporate 
R&D
Corporate 
Finance
Strategic 
Planning
Strategic 
Business Unit A
Strategic 
Business Unit B
Division
Division
Division
Strategic 
Business Unit C
Strategic 
Business Unit D
Division
Division
Division
Corporate 
Marketing
Corporate Human 
Resources
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 39>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.39 
control so that individual divisions can react more quickly to environmental 
changes. 
For example, Sony has been restructuring to match the SBU structure with its ten 
internal companies as organised into four strategic business units. Because it has 
been pushing the company to make better use of software products and content 
(e.g., Sony’s music, films and games) in its televisions and audio gear to increase 
Sony’s profitability. By its strategy, Sony is one of the few companies that have the 
opportunity to integrate software and content across a broad range of consumer 
electronics products. 
The principle underlying the grouping is that all related products-related from the 
standpoint of “function”-should fall under one SBU. In other words, the SBU 
concept helps a multi-business corporation in scientifically grouping its businesses 
into a few distinct business units. Such a grouping would in its turn, help the 
corporation carry out its strategic management endeavour better. The concept 
provides the right direction to strategic planning by removing the vagueness and 
confusion often experienced in such multi-business enterprises in the matter of 
grouping of the businesses. 
The attributes of an SBU and the benefits a firm may derive by using the SBU 
Structure are as follows: 
♦ 
A scientific method of grouping the businesses of a multi-business 
corporation which helps the firm in strategic planning. 
♦ 
An improvement over the territorial grouping of businesses and strategic 
planning based on territorial units. 
♦ 
An SBU is a grouping of related businesses that can be taken up for strategic 
planning distinct from the rest of the businesses. Products/businesses within 
an SBU receive same strategic planning treatment and priorities. 
♦ 
The task consists of analysing and segregating the assortment of 
businesses/portfolios and regrouping them into a few, well defined, distinct, 
scientifically demarcated business units. Products/businesses that are related 
from the standpoint of “function” are assembled together as a distinct SBU. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 40>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.40 
♦ 
Unrelated products/businesses in any group are separated. If they could be 
assigned to any other SBU applying the criterion of functional relation, they 
are assigned; accordingly, otherwise they are made into separate SBUs. 
♦ 
Grouping the businesses on SBU lines helps the firm in strategic planning by 
removing the vagueness and confusion generally seen in grouping 
businesses; it also facilitates the right setting for correct strategic planning 
and facilitates correct relative priorities and resources to the various 
businesses. 
♦ 
Each SBU is a separate business from the strategic planning standpoint. In the 
basic factors, viz., mission, objectives, competition and strategy-one SBU will 
be distinct from another. 
♦ 
Each SBU will have its own distinct set of competitors and its own distinct 
strategy. 
♦ 
Each SBU will have a CEO. He will be responsible for strategic planning for 
the SBU and its profit performance; he will also have control over most of the 
factors affecting the profit of the SBU. 
The questions posed at the corporate level are, first, whether the corporate 
body wishes to have a related set of SBUs or not; and if so, on what basis. This 
issue of relatedness in turn has direct implications on decisions about 
diversification relatedness might exist in different ways: 
♦ 
SBUs might build on similar technologies, or all provide similar sorts of 
products or services. 
♦ 
SBUs might be serving similar or different markets. Even if technology or 
products differ, it may be that the customers are similar. For example, the 
technologies underpinning frozen food, washing powders and margarine 
production may be very different; but all are sold through retail operations, and 
Unilever operates in all these product fields. 
♦ 
Or it may be that other competences on which the competitive advantage of 
different SBUs are built have similarities. Unilever would argue that the 
marketing skills associated with the three product markets are similar 
example. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 41>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.41 
The identification of SBUs is a convenient starting point for planning. Once the 
company’s strategic business units have been identified, the responsibilities for 
strategic planning can be more clearly assigned. 
F 
Matrix Structure 
Most organizations find that organising around either functions (in the functional 
structure) or around products and geography (in the divisional structure) provides 
an appropriate organizational structure. The matrix structure, in contrast, may be 
very appropriate when organizations conclude that neither functional nor divisional 
forms, even when combined with horizontal linking mechanisms like strategic 
business units, are right for the implementation of their strategies. In matrix 
structure, functional and product forms are combined simultaneously at the same 
level of the organization. Employees have two superiors, a product or project 
manager and a functional manager. The “home” department - that is, engineering, 
manufacturing, or marketing - is usually functional and is reasonably permanent. 
People from these functional units are often assigned temporarily to one or more 
product units or projects. The product units or projects are usually temporary and 
act like divisions in that they are differentiated on a product-market basis. 
A matrix structure is the most complex of all designs because it depends upon both 
vertical and horizontal flows of authority and communication (hence the term 
matrix). In contrast, functional and divisional structures depend primarily on vertical 
flows of authority and communication. A matrix structure can result in higher 
overhead because it has more management positions. Other characteristics of a 
matrix structure that contribute to overall complexity include dual lines of budget 
authority (a violation of the unity command principle), dual sources of reward and 
punishment, shared authority, dual reporting channels, and a need for an extensive 
and effective communication system. 
Despite its complexity, the matrix structure is widely used in many industries, 
including construction, healthcare, research and defence. Some advantages of a 
matrix structure are that project objectives are clear, there are many channels of 
communication workers can see the visible results of their work, and shutting down 
a project is accomplished relatively easily. 
In order for a matrix structure to be effective, organizations need planning, training, 
clear mutual understanding of roles and responsibilities, excellent internal 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 42>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.42 
communication, and mutual trust and confidence. The matrix structure is used more 
frequently by businesses because they are pursuing strategies add new products, 
customer groups, and technology to their range of activities. Out of these changes 
are coming product managers, functional managers, and geographic managers, all 
of whom have important strategic responsibilities. When several variables such as 
product, customer, technology, geography, functional area, have roughly equal 
strategic priorities, a matrix organization can be an effective structural form. 
Matrix structure was developed to combine the stability of the functional structure 
with the flexibility of the product form. It is very useful when the external 
environment (especially its technological and market aspects) is very complex and 
changeable. It does, however, produce conflicts revolving around duties, authority, 
and resource allocation. To the extent that the goals to be achieved are vague and 
the technology used is poorly understood, a continuous battle for power between 
product and functional mangers is likely.  
 
Figure:  Matrix Structure 
The matrix structure is often found in an organization or within an SBU when the 
following three conditions exists: 1) Ideas need to be cross-fertilised across projects 
Top Management
Manufacturing
Manufacturing
Unit
Manufacturing
Unit
Manufacturing
Unit
Manufacturing
Unit
Sales 
Sales Unit
Sales Unit
Sales Unit
Sales Unit
Finance
Finance Unit
Finance Unit
Finance Unit
Finance Unit
Personnel
Personnel
Unit
Personnel 
Unit
Personnel 
Unit
Personnel 
Unit
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 43>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.43 
or products, 2) Resources are scarce and 3) Abilities to process information and to 
make decisions need to be improved. 
Changing organizational design 
Old Organizational Design 
New Organizational Design 
♦ 
One large corporation 
♦ 
Mini- business units and cooperative  
relationships 
♦ 
Vertical communication 
♦ 
Horizontal communication 
♦ 
Centralised top- down decision 
making 
♦ 
Decentralised 
participative 
decision 
making 
♦ 
Vertical integration 
♦ 
Outsourcing & virtual organizations 
♦ 
Work/quality teams 
♦ 
Autonomous work teams 
♦ 
Functional work teams 
♦ 
Cross- functional work teams 
♦ 
Minimal training 
♦ 
Extensive training 
♦ 
Specialised job design focused 
on individual 
♦ 
Value- chain team- focused job design 
For development of matrix structure Davis and Lawrence, have proposed three 
distinct phases: 
1. 
Cross-functional task forces: Temporary cross-functional task forces are 
initially used when a new product line is being introduced. A project manager 
is in charge as the key horizontal link.  
2. 
Product/brand management: If the cross-functional task forces become 
more permanent, the project manager becomes a product or brand manager 
and a second phase begins. In this arrangement, function is still the primary 
organizational structure, but product or brand managers act as the integrators 
of semi permanent products or brands.  
3. 
Mature matrix: The third and final phase of matrix development involves a 
true dual-authority structure. Both the functional and product structures are 
permanent. All employees are connected to both a vertical functional superior 
and a horizontal product manager. Functional and product managers have 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 44>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.44 
equal authority and must work well together to resolve disagreements over 
resources and priorities. 
 
However, the matrix structure is not very popular because of difficulties in 
implementation and trouble in managing. 
G 
Network Structure 
A radical organizational design, the network structure is an example of what could 
be termed a “non-structure” by its virtual elimination of in-house business 
functions. Many activities are outsourced. A corporation organized in this manner 
is often called a virtual organization because it is composed of a series of project 
groups or collaborations linked by constantly changing non-hierarchical, cobweb-
like networks. The network structure becomes most useful when the environment 
of a firm is unstable and is expected to remain so. Under such conditions, there is 
usually a strong need for innovation and quick response. Instead of having salaried 
employees, it may contract with people for a specific project or length of time. 
Long-term contracts with suppliers and distributors replace services that the 
company could provide for itself through vertical integration. Electronic markets 
and sophisticated information systems reduce the transaction costs of the 
marketplace, thus justifying a “buy” over a “make” decision. Rather than being 
located in a single building or area, an organization’s business functions are 
scattered at different geographical locations. The organization is, in effect, only a 
shell, with a small headquarters acting as a “broker”, electronically connected to 
some completely owned divisions, partially owned subsidiaries, and other 
independent organisation. In its ultimate form, the network organization is a series 
of independent firms or business units linked together by a common system that 
designs, produces, and markets a product or service. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 45>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.45 
 
Figure:  Network Structure 
Companies like Airtel use the network structure in their operations function by 
subcontracting manufacturing to other companies in low-cost. 
The network organization structure provides an organization with increased 
flexibility and adaptability to cope with rapid technological change and shifting 
patterns of international trade and competition. It allows a company to concentrate 
on its distinctive competencies, while gathering efficiencies from other firms who 
are concentrating their efforts in their areas of expertise. The network does, 
however, have disadvantages. The availability of numerous potential partners can 
be a source of trouble. Contracting out functions to separate suppliers/distributors 
may keep the firm from discovering any synergies by combining activities. If a 
particular firm over specialises on only a few functions, it runs the risk of choosing 
the wrong functions and thus becoming non-competitive. 
The new structural arrangements that are evolving typically are in response to social 
and technological advances. While they may enable the effective management of 
dispersed organizations, there are some serious implications, The learning 
organization that is a part of new organizational forms requires that each worker 
become a self-motivated, continuous learner. Employees may lack the level of 
confidence necessary to participate actively in organization-sponsored learning 
experiences. The flatter organizational structures that accompany contemporary 
structures can seem intrusive as a result of their demand for more intense and 
 
Corporate Head Quarters (Broker) 
 
Customer  
Support  
Distributors 
Manufacturers 
Accounting 
Suppliers 
Designers 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 46>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.46 
personal interactions with internal and external stakeholders. Combined, the 
conditions above may create stress for many employees. 
H 
Hourglass Structure 
In the recent year’s information technology and communications have significantly 
altered the functioning of organizations. The role played by middle management is 
diminishing as the tasks performed by them are increasingly being replaced by the 
technological tools. Hourglass organization structure consists of three layers with 
constricted middle layer. The structure has a short and narrow middle-management 
level. Information technology links the top and bottom levels in the organization 
taking away many tasks that are performed by the middle level managers. A 
shrunken middle layer coordinates diverse lower-level activities. Contrary to 
traditional middle level managers who are often specialist, the managers in the 
hourglass structure are generalists and perform wide variety of tasks. They would 
be handling cross-functional issues emanating such as those from marketing, 
finance or production. 
 
 
Figure: Hourglass Organisation Structure 
Hourglass structure has obvious benefit of reduced costs. It also helps in enhancing 
responsiveness by simplifying decision making. Decision making authority is shifted 
close to the source of information so that it is faster. However, with the reduced 
size of middle management the promotion opportunities for the lower levels 
diminish significantly. Continuity at same level may bring monotony and lack of 
interest and it becomes difficult to keep the motivation levels high. Organisations 
try to overcome these problems by assigning challenging tasks, transferring 
laterally and having a system of proper rewards for performance. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 47>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.47 
5.4.2 Organization Culture 
Every organisation has a unique organizational culture. It has its own philosophy 
and principles, its own history, values, and rituals, its own ways of approaching 
problems and making decisions, its own work climate. It has its own embedded 
patterns of how to do things. Its own ingrained beliefs and thought patterns, and 
practices that define its corporate culture.  
Corporate culture refers to a company’s values, beliefs, business principles, 
traditions, ways of operating, and internal work environment. 
Where Does Corporate Culture Come From? 
A company’s culture is manifested in the values and business principles that 
management preaches and practices, in its ethical standards and official policies, in 
its stakeholder relationships (especially its dealings with employees, unions, 
stockholders, vendors, and the communities in which it operates), in the traditions 
the organization maintains, in its supervisory practices, in employees’ attitudes and 
behaviour, in the legends people repeat about happenings in the organization, in 
the peer pressures that exist, in the organization’s politics that permeate the work 
environment. All these sociological forces, some of which operate quite subtly, 
combine to define an organization’s culture, beliefs and practices that become 
embedded in a company’s culture can originate anywhere: from one influential 
individual, work group, department, or division, from the bottom of the 
organizational hierarchy or the top 
Frequently, a significant part of a company’s culture emerges from the stories that 
get told over and over again to illustrate to newcomers the importance of certain 
values and beliefs and ways of operating.  
Culture: ally or obstacle to strategy execution? 
An organization’s culture is either an important contributor or an obstacle to 
successful strategy execution. The beliefs, vision, objectives, and business 
approaches and practices underpinning a company’s strategy may or may not be 
compatible with its culture. When they are compatible, the culture becomes a 
valuable ally in strategy implementation and execution. When the culture is in 
conflict with some aspect of the company’s direction, performance targets or 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 48>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.48 
strategy, the culture becomes a stumbling block that impedes successful strategy 
implementation and execution. 
Role of culture in strategy execution 
Strong culture promotes good strategy execution when there’s fit and impedes 
execution when there’s negligible fit. A culture grounded in values, practices, and 
behavioural norms that match what is needed for good strategy execution helps 
energize people throughout the company to do their jobs in a strategy-supportive 
manner, adding significantly to the power and effectiveness of strategy execution. 
For example, a culture where frugality and thrift are values strongly shared by 
organizational members is very conducive to successful execution of a low-cost 
leadership strategy. A culture where creativity, embracing change, and challenging 
the status quo are pervasive themes is very conducive to successful execution of a 
product innovation and technological leadership strategy. A culture built around 
such business principles as listening to customers, encouraging employees to take 
pride in their work, and giving employees a high degree of decision-making 
authority is very conducive to successful execution of a strategy of delivering 
superior customer value. 
A work environment where the culture matches the conditions for good strategy 
execution provides a system of informal rules and peer pressure regarding how to 
conduct business internally and how to go about doing one’s job. Strategy-
supportive cultures shape the mood, temperament, and motivation the workforce, 
positively affecting organizational energy, work habits and operating practices, the 
degree to which organizational units cooperate, and how customers are treated. 
A strong strategy-supportive culture nurtures and motivates people to do their jobs 
in ways conducive to effective strategy execution; it provides structure, standards, 
and a value system in which to operate; and it promotes strong employee 
identification with the company’s vision, performance targets, and strategy. All this 
makes employees feel genuinely better about their jobs and work environment and 
the merits of what the company is trying to accomplish. Employees are stimulated 
to take on the challenge of realizing the company’s vision, do their jobs 
competently and with enthusiasm, and collaborate with others as needed to bring 
the strategy to fruition. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 49>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.49 
Perils of Strategy-Culture Conflict: When a company’s culture is out of sync with 
what is needed for strategic success, the culture has to be changed as rapidly as 
can be managed – this, of course, presumes that it is one or more aspects of the 
culture that are out of whack rather than the strategy. While correcting a strategy-
culture conflict can occasionally mean revamping strategy to produce cultural fit, 
more usually it means revamping the mismatched cultural features to produce 
strategy fit. The more entrenched the mismatched aspects of the culture, the 
greater the difficulty of implementing new or different strategies until better 
strategy-culture alignment emerges. A sizable and prolonged strategy-culture 
conflict weakens and may even defeat managerial efforts to make the strategy 
work. 
Creating a strong fit between strategy and culture: It is the strategy maker’s 
responsibility to select a strategy compatible with the “sacred” or unchangeable 
parts of prevailing corporate culture. It is the strategy implementer’s task, once 
strategy is chosen, to change whatever facets of the corporate culture hinder 
effective execution.  
Changing a problem culture: Changing a company’s culture to align it with 
strategy is among the toughest management tasks--easier to talk about than do. 
Changing a problem culture is very difficult because of the heavy anchor of deeply 
held values and habits-people cling emotionally to the old and familiar. It takes 
concerted management action over a period of time to replace an unhealthy culture 
with a healthy culture or to root out certain unwanted cultural obstacles and instil 
ones that are more strategy-supportive. 
The first step is to diagnose which facets of the present culture are strategy 
supportive and which are not. Then, managers have to talk openly and forthrightly 
to all concerned about those aspects of the culture that have to be changed. The 
talk has to be followed swiftly by visible, aggressive actions to modify the culture-
actions that everyone will understand are intended to establish a new culture more 
in tune with the strategy. The menu of culture-changing actions includes revising 
policies and procedures in ways that will help drive cultural change, altering 
incentive compensation (to reward the desired cultural behaviour), visibly praising 
and recognizing people who display the new cultural traits, recruiting and hiring 
new managers and employees who have the desired cultural values and can serve 
as role models for the desired cultural behaviour, replacing key executives who are 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 50>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.50 
strongly associated with the old culture, and taking every opportunity to 
communicate to employees the basis for cultural change and its benefits to all 
concerned. 
Implanting the needed culture-building values and behaviour depends on a 
sincere, sustained commitment by the chief executive coupled with extraordinary 
persistence in reinforcing the culture at every opportunity through both words and 
deed. Neither charisma nor personal magnetism is essential. However, personally 
talking to many departmental groups about the reasons for change is essential; 
organizational changes are seldom accomplished successfully from an office. 
Moreover, creating and sustaining a strategy-supportive culture is a job for the 
whole management team. Major cultural change requires many initiatives from 
many people. Senior managers, department heads, and middle managers have to 
reiterate values and translate the organization’s philosophy into everyday practice. 
In addition, for the culture-building effort to be successful, strategy implementers 
must enlist the support of first line supervisors and employee opinion leaders, 
convincing them of the merits of practicing and enforcing cultural norms at the 
lowest levels in the organization. Until a big majority of employees join the new 
culture and share an emotional commitment to its basic values and behavioural 
norms, there’s considerably more work to be done in both instilling the culture and 
tightening the culture strategy fit. 
The task of making culture supportive of strategy is not a short-term exercise. It 
takes time for a new culture to emerge and prevail; it’s unrealistic to expect an 
overnight transformation. The bigger the organization and the greater the cultural 
shift needed to produce a culture-strategy fit, the longer it takes. In large 
companies, changing the corporate culture in significant ways can take two to five 
years. In fact, it is usually tougher to reshape a deeply ingrained culture that is not 
strategy-supportive than it is to instill a strategy-supportive culture from scratch in 
a brand-new organization. 
In conclusion, an excessive focus on the hard management, at best will result in a 
linear improvement in performance. On the other hand, performance can be 
improved exponentially by concentrating on the soft side of the management. The 
optimal management approach probably would be somewhere between these 
extremes. Accordingly, every organisation has to maintain a fine balance between 
a range of "hard" and "soft” management as even though a structure is appropriate 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 51>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.51 
for the time it is established, by the time it is implemented, reality has already 
changed, especially in today's world. 
5.5  STRATEGIC LEADERSHIP  
A leader is best when people barely know he exists, when his work is done, his aim 
fulfilled, they will say: we did it ourselves.  
 
—Lao Tzu 
Strategic leadership sets the firms direction by developing and communicating 
vision of future, formulate strategies in the light of internal and external 
environment, brings about changes required to implement strategies and inspire 
the staff to contribute to strategy execution. A manager as a strategic leader has to 
play many leadership roles to play: visionary, chief entrepreneur and strategist, 
chief administrator, culture builder, resource acquirer and allocator, capabilities 
builder, process integrator, crisis manager, spokesperson, negotiator, motivator, 
arbitrator, policy maker, policy enforcer, and head cheerleader. Sometimes it is 
useful to be authoritarian; sometimes it is better to be a perceptive listener and a 
compromising decision maker; sometimes a strongly participative, and sometimes 
being a coach and adviser is the proper role.  
A strategic leader is a change agent to initiates strategic changes in the 
organisations and ensure that the changes successfully implemented. For the most 
part, major change efforts have to be top-down and vision-driven. Leading change 
has to start with diagnosing the situation and then deciding which of several ways 
to handle it. Managers have five leadership roles to play in pushing for good 
strategy execution:  
1.  
Staying on top of what is happening, closely monitoring progress, solving out 
issues, and learning what obstacles lie in the path of good execution. 
2.  
Promoting a culture of esprit de corps that mobilizes and energizes 
organizational members to execute strategy in a competent fashion and 
perform at a high level. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 52>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.52 
3.  
Keeping the organization responsive to changing conditions, alert for new 
opportunities, bubbling with innovative ideas, and ahead of rivals in 
developing competitively valuable competencies and capabilities. 
4.  
Exercising ethical leadership and insisting that the company conduct its 
affairs like a model corporate citizen. 
5.  
Pushing corrective actions to improve strategy execution and overall strategic 
performance. 
For example, N. R. Narayan Murthy, is known as a celebrated business leader 
because of the values he had institutionalised over his tenure as CEO of Infosys. 
One of the great legacies he left with Infosys is a strong management development 
program that builds management talent and strategic leader with ethical values.  
Dhirubhai Ambani, pioneer of Reliance Group, was an icon in himself because of 
his ability to conceptualise and create sweeping strategies, to reach corporate 
goals, and proficiency in implementing his strategic vision. Dhirubhai Ambani had 
the ability to provide clear direction for the company and had strong interpersonal 
skills that inspired the employees to contribute their best for the accomplishment 
of strategic vision. These qualities made him an excellent strategic leader in the 
corporate world. 
Leadership role in implementation: The strategic leaders must be able to use the 
strategic management process effectively by guiding the company in ways that 
result in the formation of strategic intent and strategic mission, facilitating the 
development and implementation of appropriate strategic plans and providing 
guidance to the employees for achieving strategic goals. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 53>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.53 
 
Figure: Strategy Design and Implementation: Interrelationship of Elements 
Strategic leadership entails the ability to anticipate, envision, maintain flexibility, 
and empower others to create strategic change as necessitated by external 
environment. In other words, strategic leadership represents a complex form of 
leadership in companies. A manager with strategic leadership skills exhibits the 
ability to guide the company through the new competitive landscape by influencing 
the behaviour, thoughts, and feelings of co-workers, managing through others and 
successfully processing or making sense of complex, ambiguous information by 
successfully dealing with change and uncertainty. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 54>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure: Effective Strategic Leadership 
In the today’s competitive landscape, strategic leaders are challenged to adapt their 
frames of reference so that they can deal with rapid, complex changes. A 
managerial frame of reference is the set of assumptions, premises, and accepted 
wisdom that bounds a manager’s understanding of the company, the industry in 
which it competes, and the core competencies that it exploits in the pursuit of 
strategic competitiveness (and above-average returns). In other words, a manager’s 
frame of reference is the foundation on which a manager’s mindset is built. 
The importance of a manager’s frame of reference can be seen if we perceive those 
competitive battles are not between companies or products but between mindsets 
or managerial frames. This implies that effective strategic leaders must be able to 
deal with the diverse and cognitively complex competitive situations that are 
characteristic of today’s competitive landscape. 
A Strategic leader has several responsibilities, including the following: 
♦ 
Making strategic decisions. 
 
Strategic Intent 
Strategic Mission 
Influence 
Shapes the formulation of  
Effective Strategic Leadership 
Successful Strategic Action 
 
Formulation of 
Strategies  
Implementation of 
Strategies 
Strategic Competitiveness 
Above-Average Returns 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 55>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.55 
♦ 
Formulating policies and action plans to implement strategic decision. 
♦ 
Ensuring effective communication in the organisation. 
♦ 
Managing human capital (perhaps the most critical of the strategic leader’s 
skills).  
♦ 
Managing change in the organisation. 
♦ 
Creating and sustaining strong corporate culture. 
♦ 
Sustaining high performance over time. 
Thus, the strategic leadership skills of a company’s managers represent resources 
that affect company performance. And these resources must be developed for the 
company’s future benefit.    
Strategic leadership sets the firm’s direction by developing and communicating a 
vision of future and inspire organization members to move in that direction. Unlike 
strategic leadership, managerial leadership is generally concerned with the short-
term, day-to-day activities.  
Two basic approaches to leadership can be transformational leadership style and 
transactional leadership style.  
♦ 
Transformational leadership style uses charisma and enthusiasm to inspire 
people to exert them for the good of the organization. Transformational 
leadership style may be appropriate in turbulent environments, in industries 
at the very start or end of their life-cycles, in poorly performing organizations 
when there is a need to inspire a company to embrace major changes. 
Transformational leaders offer excitement, vision, intellectual stimulation and 
personal satisfaction. They inspire involvement in a mission, giving followers 
a ‘dream’ or ‘vision’ of a higher calling so as to elicit more dramatic changes 
in organizational performance. Such a leadership motivates followers to do 
more than originally affected to do by stretching their abilities and increasing 
their self-confidence, and also promote innovation throughout the 
organization.  
♦ 
Transactional leadership style focuses more on designing systems and 
controlling the organization’s activities and are more likely to be associated 
with improving the current situation. Transactional leaders try to build on the 
existing culture and enhance current practices. Transactional leadership style 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 56>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.56 
uses the authority of its office to exchange rewards, such as pay and status. 
They prefer a more formalized approach to motivation, setting clear goals 
with explicit rewards or penalties for achievement or non-achievement.  
Transactional leadership style may be appropriate in static environment, in mature 
industries, and in organizations that are performing well. The style is better suited 
in persuading people to work efficiently and run operations smoothly.  
5.6 STRATEGIC CONTROL 
Controlling is one of the important functions of management and is often regarded 
as the core of the management process. It is a function intended to ensure and 
make possible the performance of planned activities and to achieve the pre-
determined goals and results. Control is intended to regulate and check, i.e., to 
structure and condition the behaviour of events and people, to place restraints and 
curbs on undesirable tendencies, to make people conform to certain norms and 
standards, to measure progress to keep the system on track.  It is also to ensure 
that what is planned is translated into results, to keep a watch on proper use of 
resources, on safeguarding of assets and so on. 
The controlling function involves monitoring the activity and measuring results 
against pre-established standards, analysing and correcting deviations as necessary 
and maintaining/adapting the system. It is intended to enable the organisation to 
continuously learn from its experience and to improve its capability to cope with 
the demands of organisational growth and development. 
The process of control has the following elements:  
(a) 
Objectives of the business system which could be operationalized into 
measurable and controllable standards. 
(b) 
A mechanism for monitoring and measuring the performance of the system. 
(c) 
A mechanism (i) for comparing the actual results with reference to the 
standards (ii) for detecting deviations from standards and (iii) for learning new 
insights on standards themselves. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 57>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.57 
(d) 
A mechanism for feeding back corrective and adaptive information and 
instructions to the system, for effecting the desired changes to set right the 
system to keep it on course. 
Primarily there are three types of organizational control, viz., operational control, 
management control and strategic control. 
Operational Control: The thrust of operational control is on individual tasks or 
transactions as against total or more aggregative management functions. For 
example, procuring specific items for inventory is a matter of operational control, in 
contrast to inventory management as a whole. One of the tests that can be applied 
to identify operational control areas is that there should be a clear-cut and 
somewhat measurable relationship between inputs and outputs which could be 
predetermined or estimated with least uncertainty.  
Many of the control systems in organisations are operational and mechanistic in 
nature. A set of standards, plans and instructions are formulated. The control 
activity consists of regulating the processes within certain ‘tolerances’, irrespective 
of the effects of external conditions on the formulated standards, plans and 
instructions. Some of the examples of operational controls can be stock control 
(maintaining stocks between set limits), production control (manufacturing to set 
programmes), quality control (keeping product quality between agreed limits), cost 
control (maintaining expenditure as per standards), budgetary control (keeping 
performance to budget). 
Management Control: When compared with operational control, management 
control is more inclusive and more aggregative, in the sense of embracing the 
integrated activities of a complete department, division or even entire organisation, 
instead or mere narrowly circumscribed activities of sub-units.  
The basic purpose of management control is the achievement of enterprise goals 
– short range and long range – in a most effective and efficient manner. The term 
management control is defined by Robert Anthony as ‘the process by which 
managers assure the resources are obtained and used effectively and efficiently in 
the accomplishment of the organisation’s objectives. Controls are necessary to 
influence the behaviour of events and ensure that they conform to plans.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 58>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.58 
Strategic Control: According to Schendel and Hofer “Strategic control focuses on 
the dual questions of whether: (1) the strategy is being implemented as planned; 
and (2) the results produced by the strategy are those intended.” 
There is often a time gap between the stages of strategy formulation and its 
implementation. A strategy might be affected on account of changes in internal 
and external environments of organisation. There is a need for warning systems to 
track a strategy as it is being implemented. Strategic control is the process of 
evaluating strategy as it is formulated and implemented. It is directed towards 
identifying problems and changes in premises and making necessary adjustments. 
Types of Strategic Control: There are four types of strategic controls, which are 
as follows: 
♦ 
Premise control: A strategy is formed on the basis of certain assumptions or 
premises about the complex and turbulent organizational environment. Over 
a period of time these premises may not remain valid.  Premise control is a 
tool for systematic and continuous monitoring of the environment to verify 
the validity and accuracy of the premises on which the strategy has been built. 
It primarily involves monitoring two types of factors: 
(i) 
Environmental factors such as economic (inflation, liquidity, interest 
rates), technology, social and legal-regulatory. 
(ii) 
Industry factors such as competitors, suppliers, substitutes. 
 
It is neither feasible nor desirable to control all types of premises in the 
same manner. Different premises may require different amount of 
control. Thus, managers are required to select those premises that are 
likely to change and would severely impact the functioning of the 
organization and its strategy. 
♦ 
Strategic surveillance: Contrary to the premise control, the strategic 
surveillance is unfocussed. It involves general monitoring of various sources 
of information to uncover unanticipated information having a bearing on the 
organizational strategy. It involves casual environmental browsing. Reading 
financial and other newspapers, business magazines, attending meetings, 
conferences, discussions and so on can help in strategic surveillance. 
♦ 
Strategic surveillance may be loose form of strategic control but is capable of 
uncovering information relevant to the strategy. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 59>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.59 
♦ 
Special alert control: At times, unexpected events may force organizations 
to reconsider their strategy. Sudden changes in government, natural 
calamities, terrorist attacks, unexpected merger/acquisition by competitors, 
industrial disasters and other such events may trigger an immediate and 
intense review of strategy. To cope up with such eventualities, the 
organisations form crisis management teams to handle the situation.  
♦ 
Implementation control: Managers implement strategy by converting major 
plans into concrete, sequential actions that form incremental steps. 
Implementation control is directed towards assessing the need for changes 
in the overall strategy in light of unfolding events and results associated with 
incremental steps and actions. 
 
Strategic implementation control is not a replacement to operational control. 
Unlike operational control, it continuously monitors the basic direction of the 
strategy. The two basic forms of implementation control are: 
(i) 
Monitoring strategic thrusts: Monitoring strategic thrusts helps 
managers to determine whether the overall strategy is progressing as 
desired or whether there is need for readjustments. 
(ii) 
Milestone Reviews: All key activities necessary to implement strategy 
are segregated in terms of time, events or major resource allocation. It 
normally involves a complete reassessment of the strategy. It also 
assesses the need to continue or refocus the direction of an 
organization. 
  
Source: John A Pearce II, Richard B Robinson, Jr. and Amita Mital “Strategic Management-
Formulation, Implementation and Control”. 
Strategic Surveillance 
Premise Control 
Time 1 
Time 2 
Time 3 
Strategy Formulation 
Strategy Implementation 
Implementation Control 
Special Alert Control 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 60>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.60 
These four strategic controls steer the organisation and its different sub-systems 
to the right track. They help the organisation to negotiate through the turbulent 
and complex environment.  
5.7 STRATEGIC PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
A company's performance depends heavily on execution of strategy. Companies that 
continuously outperform their competitors are those who execute well. Executives in 
a variety of businesses should explore about utilizing strategic performance 
measurement (SPM). SPM is a method that increases line executives' understanding 
of an organization's strategic goals and offers a continuous system for tracking 
progress towards these objectives using clear-cut performance measurements. SPM 
helps to eliminate silos by establishing a common language among all divisions of 
the organisation so they may communicate openly and productively.  
Strategic performance measures are key indicators that organizations use to track 
the effectiveness of their strategies and make informed decisions about resource 
allocation. The measures provide a snapshot of the organization's performance, 
enabling leaders to assess whether their strategies are aligned with their goals and 
objectives and to make necessary adjustments to improve their performance. 
Key performance measures and indicators must be created, selected, combined into 
reports and acted upon so that strategy implementation can have tangible 
outcomes. Firstly, there needs to be a clear cause and effect relationship between 
the indicators and strategic outcomes. Secondly, KPIs need to be carefully chosen 
because they will influence the behaviour of people within the organisation. 
However, managers should be aware of paralysis by over analysis. 
Managing the political aspects of implementing a strategy 
People involved in the planning process for the implementation of a strategy may 
be affected by two sets of forces. The "rational" forces of openness, communication, 
and self-analysis can exist on the one hand. On the other hand, there could be 
political forces concerned with preserving empires and fostering internal rivalry 
that urge knowledge retention, selective communication, and caution. When these 
two techniques conflict, the politically acceptable aspects may end up in the explicit 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 61>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.61 
strategy while the sensitive elements may form an unspoken plan that contains the 
implicit strategy. 
Types of Strategic Performance Measures 
There are various types of strategic performance measures, including: 
♦ 
Financial Measures: Financial measures, such as revenue growth, return on 
investment (ROI), and profit margins, provide an understanding of the 
organization's financial performance and its ability to generate profit. 
♦ 
Customer Satisfaction Measures: Customer measures, such as customer 
satisfaction, customer retention, and customer loyalty, provide insight into 
the organization's ability to meet customer needs and provide high-quality 
products and services. 
♦ 
Market Measures: Market measures, such as market share, customer 
acquisition, and customer referrals, provide information about the 
organization's competitiveness in the marketplace and its ability to attract 
and retain customers. 
♦ 
Employee Measures: Employee measures, such as employee satisfaction, 
turnover rate, and employee engagement, provide insight into the 
organization's ability to attract and retain talented employees and create a 
positive work environment. 
♦ 
Innovation Measures: Innovation measures, such as research and 
development (R&D) spending, patent applications, and new product 
launches, provide insight into the organization's ability to innovate and create 
new products and services that meet customer needs. 
♦ 
Environmental Measures: Environmental measures, such as energy 
consumption, waste reduction, and carbon emissions, provide insight into the 
organization's impact on the environment and its efforts to operate in a 
sustainable manner. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 62>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.62 
Toward More Holistic Measures of Strategic Performance 
Development of management thought and practice has persistently pushed the 
frontier of strategic performance beyond financial metrics. Thus, the Triple 
Bottom Line framework (TBL) emphasises People and Planetary Concerns 
besides profitability or Economic Prosperity alone. The Quadruple Bottomline 
adds the 4th P to add a spiritual dimension named ‘Purpose.’    
 
 
 
 
The Importance of Strategic Performance Measures 
Strategic performance measures are essential for organizations for several reasons: 
♦ 
Goal Alignment: Strategic performance measures help organizations align 
their strategies with their goals and objectives, ensuring that they are on track 
to achieve their desired outcomes. 
♦ 
Resource Allocation: Strategic performance measures provide organizations 
with the information they need to make informed decisions about resource 
allocation, enabling them to prioritize their efforts and allocate resources to 
the areas that will have the greatest impact on their performance. 
♦ 
Continuous Improvement: Strategic performance measures provide 
organizations with a framework for continuous improvement, enabling them 
to track their progress and make adjustments to improve their performance 
over time. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 63>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.63 
♦ 
External 
Accountability: 
Strategic 
performance 
measures 
help 
organizations 
demonstrate 
accountability 
to 
stakeholders, 
including 
shareholders, customers, and regulatory bodies, by providing a clear and 
transparent picture of their performance. 
Choosing the Right Strategic Performance Measures 
Organizations should choose strategic performance measures that are aligned with 
their goals and objectives and that provide relevant and actionable information. In 
selecting the right measures, organizations should consider the following factors: 
1. 
Relevance: The measure should be relevant to the organization's goals and 
objectives, providing actionable and meaningful information. This ensures 
that the performance measures are directly aligned with what the 
organization aims to achieve, and that the information obtained can drive 
improvements and strategic decisions. 
2. 
Data Availability: The measure should be based on data that is readily 
available and can be collected and analyzed in a timely manner. This is 
important to ensure that the organization can efficiently gather and utilize 
data without significant delays or obstacles. 
3. 
Data Quality: The measure should be based on high-quality data that is 
accurate and reliable. Accurate and reliable data are crucial for making 
informed decisions and assessing the true performance of the organization. 
4. 
Data Timeliness: The measure should be based on data that is current and 
up-to-date. Timely data allows organizations to make informed decisions 
quickly, enabling them to respond promptly to changes and emerging 
challenges. 
These factors are important because they provide a framework for organizations to 
assess the success of their strategies, identify areas for improvement, and make 
informed decisions about resource allocation and strategic adjustments. Effective 
strategic performance measures should be relevant, meaningful, easy to 
understand, and regularly reviewed and updated to ensure their continued 
alignment with the organization's goals and objectives. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 64>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.64 
 
SUMMARY 
The chapter on Strategy Implementation and Evaluation provides a comprehensive 
overview of the processes and factors involved in executing and assessing the 
effectiveness of organizational strategies. The following are the main learning 
objectives covered in the chapter: 
♦ 
The process of Strategy Implementation: The chapter describes the process 
of strategy implementation, including the formulation vs. implementation 
matrix, the linkages and issues involved, and the role of clear communication, 
effective leadership, and proper resource allocation. 
♦ 
Strategic Change through Digital Transformation: The chapter explores the 
impact of digital transformation on strategy implementation and the role of 
technology in driving strategic change. 
♦ 
Organisation Structure (hard) vs Culture (soft): The chapter differentiates 
between hard factors, such as structure and systems, and soft factors, such as 
culture and leadership, in strategy implementation and explains their impact 
on organizational performance. 
♦ 
Strategic Leadership: The chapter discusses the role of strategic leadership in 
the implementation process and the importance of leaders who are visionary, 
innovative, and able to motivate and engage their teams. 
♦ 
Strategic Control: The chapter explains the role of strategic control in the 
implementation process and the importance of monitoring progress, 
adapting to changes in the environment, and making informed decisions 
based on data and analysis. 
♦ 
Strategic Performance Measures: The chapter identifies key strategic 
performance measures, including customer satisfaction, market share, return 
on investment, employee satisfaction, innovation, and environmental 
sustainability, and explains their importance in tracking progress and making 
informed decisions about resource allocation. 
♦ 
In conclusion, the chapter provides a comprehensive overview of the key 
elements of effective strategy implementation and evaluation and equips 
readers with the knowledge and skills needed to execute and assess their 
organization's strategies. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 65>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.65 
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. 
______________leadership style may be appropriate in turbulent environment. 
(a)  
Transactional  
(b)  
Transformational 
(c)  
Autocratic 
(d)  
None of these 
2. 
An organizational structure with constricted middle level is:  
(a) 
Divisional structure 
(b) 
Network structure 
(c) 
Hourglass structure  
(d) 
Matrix structure 
3.  
You are the head of operations of a company. When you focus on total or 
aggregate management functions in the sense of embracing the integrated 
activities of a complete department et al, you are practicing: - 
(a) 
Strategic Control                   
(b)  
Management control 
(c) 
Administrative Control          
(d)  
Operations Control 
4. 
Which of the following would be chosen by the core strategist to implement 
operational control: - 
(a) 
Premise Control                     
(b  
Special Alert Control 
(c) 
Implementation Control        
(d)  
Budgetary Control 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 66>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.66 
5.  
Compliance, Identification and Internalization are the three processes involved 
in: 
(a) 
Refreezing 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Defreezing  
 
 
 
(c)  
Changing behavior patterns 
(d)  
Breaking down old attitudes 
6.  
Which one is NOT a type of strategic control? 
(a) 
Operational control 
(b) 
Strategic surveillance 
(c) 
Special alert control 
(d) 
Premise control 
Scenario Based Questions 
1. 
Imagine you are a consultant advising a small manufacturing company 
embarking on a digital transformation journey. The company's leadership is 
concerned about managing the change effectively. Using the best practices for 
managing change in small and medium-sized businesses, outline a strategy to 
help the company navigate this transformation successfully. 
2. 
A Mumbai-based conglomerate, PQR Ltd., has announced a major restructuring 
of its business operations. The company has decided to split its business into 
four separate units: Manufacturing, Retail, Services, and Technology. Each unit 
will operate as a separate business, with delegated responsibility for day-to-day 
operations and strategy to the respective unit managers. Identify the 
organization structure that PQR Ltd. has planned to implement. Discuss any four 
attributes and the benefits the firm may derive by using this organization 
structure. 
3.  
York Investors, recognizing the importance of aligning its organizational 
elements with strategic objectives, has strategically invested in training 
programs, technology, and communication systems. The company aims to 
enhance the skills and capabilities of its workforce through comprehensive 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 67>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.67 
training initiatives. Simultaneously, York Investors leverages cutting-edge 
technology to streamline its operations and improve overall efficiency. The 
investment in communication systems ensures seamless collaboration and 
information flow across various departments. Identify and explain the model 
used by York Investors to achieve its strategic objectives. 
4. 
Ramesh, is owner of a popular brand of Breads. Yashpal, his son after completing 
Chartered Accountancy started assisting his father in running of business. The 
approaches followed by father and son in management were very different. 
While Ramesh preferred to use authority and having a formal system of defining 
goals and motivation with explicit rewards and punishments, Yashpal believed 
in involving employees and generating enthusiasm to inspire people to deliver 
in the organization.  
Discuss the difference in leadership style of father and son. 
5. 
Suresh Sinha has been recently appointed as the head of a strategic business 
unit of a large multiproduct company.  Advise Mr Sinha about the leadership 
role to be played by him in execution of strategy. 
6. 
KaAthens Ltd., a diversified business entity having business operations across 
the globe. The company leadership has just changed as Mr. D. Bandopadhyay 
handed over the pedals to his son Aditya Bandopadhyay, due to his poor health. 
Aditya is a highly educated with an engineering degree from IIT, Delhi. However, 
being very young he is not clear about his role and responsibilities,   
In your view, what are the responsibilities of Aditya Bandopadhyay as CEO of 
the company. 
7. 
Manoj started his telecom business in 2010. Over next five years, he gradually 
hired fifty people for various activities such as to keep his accounts, 
administration, sell his products in the market, create more customers, provide 
after sales service, coordinate with vendors.  
Draw the organization structure Manoj should implement in his organization 
and name it.  
8. 
Moonlight Private Limited deals in multi-products and multi-businesses. It has 
its own set of competitors. It seems impractical for the company to provide 
separate strategic planning treatment to each one of its product or businesses. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 68>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.68 
As a strategic manager, suggest the type of structure best suitable for Moonlight 
Private Limited and state its benefits.  
9. 
Sanya Private Limited is an automobile company. For the past few years, it has 
been observed that the progress of the company has become stagnant. When 
scrutinized, it was found that the planning department was performing fairly 
well but the plans could not be implemented due to improper use of resources, 
undesirable tendencies of workers and non-conformance to norms and 
standards. You are hired as a Strategic Manager. Suggest the elements of 
process of control to overcome the problem.  
Descriptive Questions 
1. 
What is a strategic business unit? What are its advantages? 
2. 
Draw 'Divisional Structure' with the help of a diagram. Also, give advantages 
and disadvantages of this structure in brief. 
3. 
What is an ‘hourglass structure’? How can this structure benefit an organization? 
4. 
How can you differentiate between transformational and transactional leaders? 
5. 
What is strategic change? Explain the change process proposed by Kurt Lewin 
that can be useful in implementing strategies? 
6. 
What are the differences between operational control and management control? 
7. 
What is strategic control? Briefly explain the different types of strategic control. 
8. 
What is implementation control? Discuss its basic forms. 
ANSWERS/SOLUTIONS 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1 
(b) 
2 
(c) 
3 
(b) 
4 
(d) 
5 
(c) 
6 
(a) 
Answers to Scenario Based Questions 
1.  
To help the small manufacturing company navigate its digital transformation 
successfully, we would recommend the following strategy: 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 69>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.69 
1. 
Begin at the top: The leadership team should be united and committed 
to the digital transformation. They should communicate a clear vision 
for the future of the company and lead by example. 
2. 
Ensure that the change is necessary and desired: Before 
implementing any changes, the company should assess its current state 
and identify areas where digital transformation can add value. It's 
important to involve employees in this process to ensure their buy-in. 
3. 
Reduce disruption: Employee perceptions of change can vary, so it's 
important to minimize disruption. This can be done by communicating 
early and often about the changes, providing training and support for 
employees, and empowering change agents within the organization. 
4. 
Encourage communication: Create channels for employees to ask 
questions and provide feedback. Encourage collaboration between 
departments to share ideas and innovations. Effective communication 
can help alleviate fears and keep everyone aligned. 
5. 
Recognize that change is the norm: Digital transformation is not a 
one-time project but an ongoing process. The company should be 
prepared to adapt to new technologies and market conditions 
continuously. 
 
By following these best practices, the small manufacturing company can 
successfully navigate its digital transformation and position itself for future 
growth and success. 
2.  
PQR Ltd. has planned to implement the Strategic Business Unit (SBU) structure. 
Very large organisations, particularly those running into several products, or 
operating at distant geographical locations that are extremely diverse in terms 
of environmental factors, can be better managed by creating strategic 
business units. SBU structure becomes imperative in an organisation with 
increase in number, size and diversity.  
 
The attributes of an SBU and the benefits a firm may derive by using the SBU 
Structure are as follows: 
♦ 
A scientific method of grouping the businesses of a multi – business 
corporation which helps the firm in strategic planning. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 70>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.70 
♦ 
An improvement over the territorial grouping of businesses and 
strategic planning based on territorial units. 
♦ 
Strategic planning for SBU is distinct from rest of businesses. Products/ 
businesses within an SBU receive same strategic planning treatment and 
priorities. 
♦ 
Each SBU will have its own distinct set of competitors and its own 
distinct strategy. 
♦ 
The CEO of SBU will be responsible for strategic planning for SBU and 
its profit performance. 
♦ 
Products/businesses that are related from the standpoint of function 
are assembled together as a distinct SBU. 
♦ 
Unrelated products/ businesses in any group are separated into 
separate SBUs. 
♦ 
Grouping the businesses on SBU lines helps in strategic planning by 
removing the vagueness and confusion. 
♦ 
Each SBU is a separate business and will be distinct from one another 
on the basis of mission, objectives etc.   
3.  
York Investors is employing the McKinsey 7S Model to achieve its strategic 
objectives. The model focuses on seven interdependent elements within an 
organization, categorized into "Hard Ss" and "Soft Ss." In this case: 
♦ 
Strategy (Hard S): Investing in training programs and technology 
aligns with the strategic objective of enhancing workforce skills and 
operational efficiency. 
♦ 
Structure (Hard S): The investment suggests a structural alignment to 
support the strategic initiatives, indicating a deliberate organization of 
resources. 
♦ 
Systems (Hard S): The use of cutting-edge technology and 
communication systems reflects a commitment to optimizing daily 
tasks and improving overall efficiency, addressing the system 
component of the model. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 71>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.71 
♦ 
Shared Values (Soft S): The emphasis on comprehensive training 
initiatives indicates a commitment to shared values, reflecting a focus 
on developing a skilled and capable workforce. 
♦ 
Style (Soft S): The leadership style is implied in the strategic decision 
to invest in technology and training for workforce development and 
operational efficiency. 
♦ 
Staff (Soft S): The commitment to enhancing skills and capabilities 
reflects a focus on the talent pool within the organization. 
♦ 
Skills (Soft S): The strategic investment in training programs directly 
addresses the development of key skills within the workforce. 
 
York Investors' approach demonstrates a holistic application of the McKinsey 
7S Model, emphasizing the interconnectedness of both hard and soft 
elements to achieve strategic alignment and organizational effectiveness. 
4. 
Ramesh is a follower of transactional leadership style that focuses on 
designing systems and controlling the organization’s activities. Such a leader 
believes in using authority of its office to exchange rewards, such as pay and 
status. They prefer a more formalized approach to motivation, setting clear 
goals with explicit rewards or penalties for achievement or non-achievement. 
Transactional leaders try to build on the existing culture and enhance current 
practices. The style is better suited in persuading people to work efficiently 
and run operations smoothly.  
On the other hand, Yashpal is follower of transformational leadership style. 
The style uses charisma and enthusiasm to inspire people to exert them for 
the good of the organization. Transformational leaders offer excitement, 
vision, intellectual stimulation and personal satisfaction. They inspire 
involvement in a mission, giving followers a ‘dream’ or ‘vision’ of a higher 
calling so as to elicit more dramatic changes in organizational performance. 
Such a leadership motivates followers to do more than originally affected to 
do by stretching their abilities and increasing their self-confidence, and also 
promote innovation throughout the organization.  
5. 
Leading change has to start with diagnosing the situation and then deciding 
which of several ways to handle it. Managers have five leadership roles to play 
in pushing for good strategy execution:  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 72>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.72 
(i) 
Staying on top of what is happening, closely monitoring progress, 
solving out issues, and learning what obstacles lie in the path of good 
execution. 
(ii) 
Promoting a culture of esprit de corps that mobilizes and energizes 
organizational members to execute strategy in a competent fashion and 
perform at a high level. 
(iii) 
Keeping the organization responsive to changing conditions, alert for 
new opportunities, bubbling with innovative ideas, and ahead of rivals 
in developing competitively valuable competencies and capabilities. 
(iv) 
Exercising ethical leadership and insisting that the company conduct its 
affairs like a model corporate citizen. 
(v) 
Pushing corrective actions to improve strategy execution and overall 
strategic performance. 
6. 
Aditya Bandopadhyay, an effective strategic leader of KaAthens Ltd. must be 
able to deal with the diverse and cognitively complex competitive situations 
that are characteristic of today’s competitive landscape. 
A Strategic leader has several responsibilities, including the following: 
♦ 
Making strategic decisions. 
♦ 
Formulating policies and action plans to implement strategic decision. 
♦ 
Ensuring effective communication in the organisation. 
♦ 
Managing human capital (perhaps the most critical of the strategic 
leader’s skills).  
♦ 
Managing change in the organisation. 
♦ 
Creating and sustaining strong corporate culture. 
♦ 
Sustaining high performance over time. 
7. 
Manoj has started a telecom business. Accounts, Administration, Marketing 
(customer creation, after sales service, vendor coordination) are the functional 
areas that are desired in the organisational structure. Further there is inherent 
need to have a department for the management of telecom services/ 
operations.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 73>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.73 
Thus, the functional structure in the telecom business of Manoj can be as 
follows: 
 
8. 
It is advisable for Moonlight Private Limited to follow the strategic business 
unit (SBU) structure. 
Moonlight Private Limited has a multi-product and multi-business structure 
where, each of these businesses has its own set of competitors. In the given 
case, Strategic Business Unit (SBU) structure would best suit the interests of 
the company.  
SBU is a part of a large business organization that is treated separately for 
strategic management purposes. It is separate part of large business serving 
product markets with readily identifiable competitors. It is created by adding 
another level of management in a divisional structure after the divisions have 
been grouped under a divisional top management authority based on the 
common strategic interests.  
Very large organizations, particularly those running into several products, or 
operating at distant geographical locations that are extremely diverse in terms 
of environmental factors, can be better managed by creating strategic 
business units, just as is the case for Moonlight Private Limited. SBU structure 
becomes imperative in an organization with increase in number, size and 
diversity.  
 
 
Chairman (Managing 
Director/ CEO)
Telecom 
Operations
Accounts 
and Finance
Marketing
Sales 
(Customer 
Creation)
After Sales 
Service
Vendor 
Coordination
Administration
Human 
Resource, etc.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 74>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.74 
Benefits of SBUs: 
1. 
Establishing coordination between divisions having common strategic 
interest. 
2. 
Facilitate strategic management and control. 
3. 
Determine accountability at the level of distinct business units. 
4. 
Allow strategic planning to be done at the most relevant level within the 
total enterprise.  
5. 
Make the task of strategic review by top executives more objective and 
more effective.  
6. 
Help to allocate resources to areas with better opportunities. 
Thus, an SBU structure with its set of advantages would be most suitable for 
the company with the given diverse businesses having separate identifiable 
competitors, but a common organizational goal. 
9. 
Sanya Private Limited deteriorating performance due to poor implementation 
of plans that is improper use of resources, undesirable tendencies of the 
workers, and non-conformance to norms and standards, all point towards 
weak controls in the organization. Implementation of plans cannot assure 
results unless strong and sufficient controls are put in place. The management 
of the company should focus diligently on developing controls especially in 
the identified problem areas. 
The process of control has the following elements:  
(a) 
Objectives of the business system which could be operationalized into 
measurable and controllable standards. 
(b) 
A mechanism for monitoring and measuring the performance of the 
system. 
(c) 
A mechanism (i) for comparing the actual results with reference to the 
standards (ii) for detecting deviations from standards and (iii) for 
learning new insights on standards themselves. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 75>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.75 
(d) 
A mechanism for feeding back corrective and adaptive information and 
instructions to the system, for effecting the desired changes to set right 
the system to keep it on course. 
Above elements of control would ensure a proper check on improper use of 
resources, undesirable tendencies of the workers, and non-conformance to 
norms and standards and ensure a result oriented implementation of plans. 
Answers to Descriptive Questions 
1. 
A strategic business unit (SBU) is any part of a business organization which is 
treated separately for strategic management purposes. The concept of SBU is 
helpful in creating an SBU organizational structure. It is discrete element of 
the business serving product markets with readily identifiable competitors and 
for which strategic planning can be concluded. It is created by adding another 
level of management in a divisional structure after the divisions have been 
grouped under a divisional top management authority based on the common 
strategic interests. 
Advantages of SBU are: 
♦ 
Establishing coordination between divisions having common strategic 
interests. 
♦ 
Facilitates strategic management and control on large and diverse 
organizations. 
♦ 
Fixes accountabilities at the level of distinct business units. 
♦ 
Allows strategic planning to be done at the most relevant level within 
the total enterprise.  
♦ 
Makes the task of strategic review by top executives more objective and 
more effective.  
♦ 
Helps allocate corporate resources to areas with greatest growth 
opportunities. 
2. 
Divisional structure is that organizational structure which is based on extensive 
delegation of authority and built on division basis. The divisional structure can 
be organized in one of the four ways: by geographic area, by product or 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 76>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.76 
service, by customer, or by process. With a divisional structure, functional 
activities are performed both centrally and in each division separately. 
 
Figure: Divisional Structure 
Advantages of Divisional Structure  
♦ 
Accountability is clear: Divisional managers can be held responsible 
for sales and profit levels. Because a divisional structure is based on 
extensive delegation of authority, managers and employees can easily 
see the results of their good or bad performances and thus their morale 
is high. 
♦ 
Other advantages: It creates career development opportunities for 
managers, allows local control of local situations, leads to a competitive 
climate within an organization, and allows new businesses and products 
to be added easily. 
Disadvantages of Divisional Structure  
♦ 
Higher cost: Owing to following reasons: (i). requires qualified 
functional specialist at different divisions and needed centrally (at 
headquarters); (ii). It requires an elaborate, headquarters –driven 
control system.  
Chief Executive
General Manager Division A
Marketing
Production
Personnel
General Manager Division B
Marketing
Production
Personnel
Corporate Finance
Corporate Legal/PR
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 77>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.77 
♦ 
Conflicts between divisional managers: Certain regions, products, or 
customers may sometimes receive special treatment, and it may be 
difficult to maintain consistent, company-wide practices. 
 
3. 
In the recent years information technology and communications have 
significantly altered the functioning of organizations. The role played by 
middle management is diminishing as the tasks performed by them are 
increasingly being replaced by the technological tools. Hourglass organization 
structure consists of three layers in an organisation structure with constricted 
middle layer. The structure has a short and narrow middle management level. 
Information technology links the top and bottom levels in the organization 
taking away many tasks that are performed by the middle level managers. A 
shrunken middle layer coordinates diverse lower level activities. 
 
Hourglass Organization Structure 
Hourglass structure has obvious benefit of reduced costs. It also helps in 
enhancing responsiveness by simplifying decision making. Decision making 
authority is shifted close to the source of information so that it is faster. 
However, with the reduced size of middle management, the promotion 
opportunities for the lower levels diminish significantly. 
4. 
Difference between transformational and transactional leadership 
1. 
Transformational leadership style uses charisma and enthusiasm to 
inspire people to exert them for the good of organization. Transactional 
leadership style uses the authority of its office to exchange rewards such 
as pay, status symbols etc. 
2. 
Transformational leadership style may be appropriate in turbulent 
environment, in industries at the very start or end of their cycles, poorly 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 78>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.78 
performing organisations, when there is a need to inspire a company to 
embrace major changes. Transactional leadership style can be 
appropriate in static environment, in growing or mature industries and 
in organisations that are performing well. 
3. 
Transformational leaders inspire employees by offering excitement, 
vision, intellectual stimulation and personal satisfaction. Transactional 
leaders prefer a more formalized approach to motivation, setting clear 
goals with explicit rewards or penalties for achievement and non-
achievement. Transactional leaders focus mainly to build on existing 
culture and enhance current practices. 
5. 
The changes in the environmental forces often require businesses to make 
modifications in their existing strategies and bring out new strategies. 
Strategic change is a complex process and it involves a corporate strategy 
focused on new markets, products, services and new ways of doing business. 
To make the change lasting, Kurt Lewin proposed three phases of the change 
process for moving the organization from the present to the future. These 
stages are unfreezing, changing and refreezing. 
(a) 
Unfreezing the situation: The process of unfreezing simply makes the 
individuals or organizations aware of the necessity for change and 
prepares them for such a change. Lewin proposes that the changes 
should not come as a surprise to the members of the organization. 
Sudden and unannounced change would be socially destructive and 
morale lowering. The management must pave the way for the change by 
first “unfreezing the situation”, so that members would be willing and 
ready to accept the change. 
 
Unfreezing is the process of breaking down the old attitudes and 
behaviours, customs and traditions so that they start with a clean slate. This 
can be achieved by making announcements, holding meetings and 
promoting the ideas throughout the organization.  
(b) 
Changing to New situation: Once the unfreezing process has been 
completed and the members of the organization recognise the need for 
change and have been fully prepared to accept such change, their 
behaviour patterns need to be redefined. H.C. Kellman proposed three 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 79>>
 
STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
 
5.79 
methods for reassigning new patterns of behavior as compliance, 
identification and internalisation.  
(c) 
Refreezing: Refreezing occurs when the new behaviour becomes a 
normal way of life. The new behaviour must replace the former 
behaviour completely for successful and permanent change to take 
place. In order for the new behaviour to become permanent, it must be 
continuously reinforced so that this newly acquired behaviour does not 
diminish or extinguish. 
 
Change process is not a one time application but a continuous process 
due to dynamism and ever changing environment. The process of 
unfreezing, changing and refreezing is a cyclical one and remains 
continuously in action. 
6. 
Differences between Operational Control and Management Control are 
as under: 
(i) 
The thrust of operational control is on individual tasks or transactions as 
against total or more aggregative management functions. When 
compared with operational, management control is more inclusive and 
more aggregative, in the sense of embracing the integrated activities of 
a complete department, division or even entire organisation, instead or 
mere narrowly circumscribed activities of sub-units. For example, 
procuring specific items for inventory is a matter of operational control, in 
contrast to inventory management as a whole.  
(ii) 
Many of the control systems in organisations are operational and 
mechanistic in nature. A set of standards, plans and instructions are 
formulated. On the other hand, the basic purpose of management 
control is the achievement of enterprise goals – short range and long 
range – in an effective and efficient manner. 
7. 
Strategic Control focuses on the dual questions of whether: (1) the strategy is 
being implemented as planned; and (2) the results produced by the strategy 
are those intended. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 80>>
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
 
5.80 
There are four types of strategic control: 
♦ 
Premise control: A strategy is formed on the basis of certain 
assumptions or premises about the environment. Premise control is a 
tool for systematic and continuous monitoring of the environment to 
verify the validity and accuracy of the premises on which the strategy 
has been built.  
♦ 
Strategic surveillance: Strategic surveillance is unfocussed. It involves 
general monitoring of various sources of information to uncover 
unanticipated information having a bearing on the organizational strategy.  
♦ 
Special alert control: At times, unexpected events may force 
organizations to reconsider their strategy. Sudden changes in government, 
natural calamities, unexpected merger/acquisition by competitors, 
industrial disasters and other such events may trigger an immediate and 
intense review of strategy.  
♦ 
Implementation control: Managers implement strategy by converting 
major plans into concrete, sequential actions that form incremental steps. 
Implementation control is directed towards assessing the need for 
changes in the overall strategy in light of unfolding events and results. 
8. 
Managers implement strategy by converting major plans into concrete, 
sequential actions that form incremental steps. Implementation control is 
directed towards assessing the need for changes in the overall strategy in light 
of unfolding events and results associated with incremental steps and actions. 
Strategic implementation control is not a replacement to operational control. 
Strategic implementation control, unlike operational controls continuously 
monitors the basic direction of the strategy. The two basic forms of 
implementation control are: 
(i) 
Monitoring strategic thrusts: Monitoring strategic thrusts help 
managers to determine whether the overall strategy is progressing as 
desired or whether there is need for readjustments. 
(ii) 
Milestone Reviews. All key activities necessary to implement strategy 
are segregated in terms of time, events or major resource allocation. It 
normally involves a complete reassessment of the strategy. It also 
assesses the need to continue or refocus the direction of an 
organization. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 81>>
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CASE SCENARIOS 
 
 
Case Scenario 1 
In the fiercely competitive automotive industry, Zing, a promising newcomer, set 
out on a strategic journey with ambitions of making a substantial impact. 
Recognizing the significance of a robust distribution network early on, Zing forged 
partnerships with established dealerships, offering them attractive margins. This 
strategic move significantly enhanced Zing's reach, with a presence in 80% of the 
nation's dealerships by 2022, expanding its coverage significantly. 
To differentiate themselves from competitors, Zing adopted two key strategies. 
Firstly, they prioritized product design, investing heavily in aesthetics and 
incorporating innovative features and environmentally friendly technologies. This 
focus on design led to their vehicles receiving excellent reviews and achieving an 
impressive 15% year-on-year growth in sales. 
Secondly, Zing implemented switching costs to discourage customers from 
switching to other brands. Their vehicles featured branded software, making it both 
expensive and cumbersome for customers to transition to alternative brands. This 
strategic move effectively protected Zing's market share. 
Zing's overarching goal was to position itself as a premium automotive brand, 
blending luxury with sustainability. However, their execution fell down as they 
challenged with maintaining consistent quality and service levels, resulting in mixed 
customer reviews. 
Despite their best efforts, Zing's differentiation strategy fell short due to issues with 
inconsistent quality and service. Negative word-of-mouth and declining customer 
satisfaction scores tarnished their brand image, leading to stagnating sales. This 
failure to deliver on their brand promise proved to be a significant setback. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 82>>
 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
CS.2 
As Zing's reputation suffered from execution failures, securing additional funds for 
international expansion became challenging. Consequently, they made the difficult 
decision to postpone their global ambitions for the next five years, focusing instead 
on stabilizing their finances and rebuilding their brand image. 
In summary, Zing's strategic journey illustrates the importance of not only crafting 
a compelling differentiation strategy but also executing it flawlessly. In the 
competitive automotive landscape, maintaining consistent quality and service is 
paramount to sustaining brand loyalty and achieving long-term success. 
Based on the above Case Scenario, answer the Multiple Choice Questions. 
(i)  
What key strategic approach did Zing use to expand its market presence in 
the automotive industry?  
(a)  
Product innovation and design 
(b)  
Cost leadership strategy 
(c)  
Entering new international markets 
(d)  
Vertical integration 
 
(ii)  
How did Zing protect its market share from potential competitors?  
(a)  
Price-cutting strategy 
(b)  
Branded software and switching costs 
(c)  
Aggressive marketing campaigns 
(d)  
International expansion  
(iii)  Why did Zing's differentiation strategy fall short in the market? 
 
(a)  
Intense price competition 
(b)  
Poor marketing strategy 
(c)  
Inconsistent quality and service 
(d)  
Lack of international expansion  
(iv)  Forging partnerships with established dealerships to enhance its distribution 
network falls under which level of strategy?   
(a)  
Corporate level strategy  
(b)  
Business level strategy  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 83>>
 
 
CS.3 
CASE SCENARIOS 
(c)  
Functional level strategy  
(d)  
Competitive level strategy 
 
(v)  
How did Zing initially expand its market presence across the nation? 
(a)  
Aggressive marketing campaigns 
(b)  
Developing low-cost vehicles 
(c)  
Partnering with established dealerships 
(d)  
Launching a luxury brand 
 
Answers 
(i) 
(a) 
(ii) 
(b) 
(iii) 
(c) 
(iv) 
(b) 
(v) 
(c) 
Case Scenario 2 
Café Delight, a thriving restaurant chain known for its unique blend of Australian 
and Indian culinary experiences, embarked on a remarkable journey from its 
humble beginnings as a small café in Australia to becoming a renowned player in 
the Indian restaurant industry. This case study digs into the strategic decisions and 
market dynamics that fueled Café Delight's growth, highlighting its transition from 
a single café in Powai, Mumbai, to a flourishing chain with a presence in five cities 
and over 25 stores. It explores how Café Delight effectively leveraged social media 
and adapted its pricing strategy to compete with global brands while maintaining 
a healthy profit margin. 
In 2005, Café Delight was founded in Melbourne, Australia, by a passionate 
entrepreneur with a vision to bring the flavors of Australia and India together. The 
first café established in Powai, Mumbai, received accolades for its unique menu, 
blending Australian coffee culture with Indian culinary traditions. Over the course 
of five years, Café Delight expanded to three stores in Mumbai, driven by 
exceptional mouth publicity, customer loyalty, and consistent quality. 
As the social media landscape evolved, Café Delight recognized the power of online 
platforms in reaching a wider audience. By effectively utilizing social media and 
online marketing, Café Delight expanded its presence to five cities across India and 
established over 25 stores. Customer engagement through social media platforms 
enabled the brand to create a strong and vibrant community, driving organic 
growth. 
Café Delight's customer-centric approach involved continuously evolving its menu 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 84>>
 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
CS.4 
to cater to the changing tastes and dietary preferences of its patrons. By 
understanding the evolving needs of its customers, Café Delight could offer 
personalized menu items, seasonal specials, and dietary alternatives. This approach 
created a sense of loyalty and engagement among customers, strengthening the 
brand's appeal. Not just customers but High-power, low-interest stakeholders, 
including regulatory authorities, were addressed with careful compliance and 
adherence to industry standards. Low-power, high-interest stakeholders, like 
potential customers and local communities, were engaged through targeted 
marketing campaigns and community involvement initiatives. This meticulous 
stakeholder analysis allowed Café Delight to build and maintain strong 
relationships with each group, effectively managing their influence and impact on 
the brand. 
With its expanding presence and increasing popularity, Café Delight underwent a 
shift in its pricing strategy. It transitioned from a pocket-friendly pricing model to 
a skimming strategy, capitalizing on its unique blend of Australian and Indian 
flavors to position itself as a premium restaurant. Café Delight faced stiff 
competition from global brands entering the Indian market but maintained a profit 
margin of approximately 30% through menu engineering and targeted pricing. 
In one of its kind, using strategic tools enabled Café Delight to identify and act on 
opportunities while mitigating threats, contributing to its long-term success in the 
highly competitive restaurant industry. 
Based on the above Case Scenario, answer the Multiple-Choice Questions. 
(i)  
Café Delight effectively leveraged social media and adapted its pricing 
strategy as it stepped into which phase of business life cycle of operations? 
(a) 
Introduction Stage 
(b) 
Growth Stage 
(c) 
Maturity Stage 
(d) 
Decline Stage 
 
(ii)  
What stakeholder group did Café Delight engage through targeted marketing 
campaigns and community involvement initiatives? 
(a) 
High-power, high-interest stakeholders 
(b) 
Low-power, low-interest stakeholders 
(c) 
Low-power, high-interest stakeholders 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 85>>
 
 
CS.5 
CASE SCENARIOS 
(d) 
High-power, low-interest stakeholders   
(iii)  What best describes Café Delight's initial expansion strategy when it 
expanded from one café to three in Mumbai? 
(a) 
Aggressive price reduction 
(b) 
Leveraging customer loyalty and word-of-mouth publicity 
(c) 
Extensive online marketing 
(d) 
Embracing global branding strategies   
(iv)  At which level of strategic management does Café Delight's transition from a 
pocket-friendly pricing model to a skimming strategy fit?  
(a) 
Corporate level  
(b) 
Business level  
(c) 
Functional level  
(d) 
Operational level 
(v)  
What type of strategy did Café Delight use to differentiate itself from 
competitors in the Indian restaurant industry? 
(a) 
Cost leadership strategy 
(b) 
Focused differentiation strategy 
(c) 
Cost focus strategy 
(d) 
Hybrid strategy   
Answers 
(i) 
(b) 
(ii) 
(c) 
(iii) 
(b) 
(iv) 
(b) 
(v) 
(b) 
Case Scenario 3 
Swasthya, a rising star in India's dynamic healthcare sector, stands out as a prime 
example of smart strategic management.  
At Swasthya, the compass guiding their endeavors is a compelling thought: to 
emerge as the finest healthcare provider renowned for delivering accessible, top-
notch healthcare services. This overarching goal is not an isolated vision, but a 
thread woven into the very fabric of the organization, driving every facet of their 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 86>>
 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
CS.6 
operations. The people of the organization play a pivotal role in this journey. They 
are entrusted with translating this vision into tangible outcomes at the grassroots 
level, ensuring that local operations are aligned with the grand aspiration of 
becoming a healthcare leader.  
Swasthya works meticulously towards optimizing each link of the patient 
experience. From streamlining appointment scheduling to expediting test result 
delivery, every facet of the healthcare journey is scrutinized. Swasthya's strategy is 
not merely about being a player in the market but about strategically positioning 
themselves as leaders. They proactively recognize the constant innovations that 
could disrupt their areas of expertise. To counter this, they introduced value-added 
offerings such as telemedicine and wellness programs. This addition not only 
mitigates the risk but also fortifies their long-term viability. 
Beyond competition, ensuring the quality and safety of patient care is paramount 
at Swasthya. Stringent hygiene protocols, equipment maintenance regimens, and 
adherence to healthcare regulations form the cornerstone of their business. In 
parallel, the organization meticulously undertakes regular assessment as a central 
element of its decision-making apparatus. This forward-looking exercise 
encompasses identifying and assessing potential risks such as regulatory changes, 
medical malpractice vulnerabilities, or shifts in market dynamics, all of which could 
have far-reaching consequences for their long-term objectives. 
The implementation of Swasthya's strategy is steered by the McKinsey 7S model, 
which ensures a harmonious alignment of seven critical elements: strategy, 
structure, systems, shared values, skills, style, and staff. It emphasizes that the 
success of a long-term objective is contingent on the synchronization of these 
seven elements, reinforcing the idea that strategic management is not a 
compartmentalized process but a comprehensive activity. 
Swasthya's strategic journey through India's healthcare landscape is a testament to 
the seamless integration of core management concepts, guiding its actions and 
strategies, while keeping the vision and intent at the core. 
Based on the above Case Scenario, answer the Multiple Choice Questions. 
(i)  
How does Swasthya's approach to premise control, including stringent 
hygiene protocols and equipment maintenance, contribute to their long-term 
objectives and which concept does it align with? 
(a) 
It reduces immediate costs and aligns with strategic risk assessment. 
(b) 
It safeguards quality and aligns with strategic risk assessment. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 87>>
 
 
CS.7 
CASE SCENARIOS 
(c) 
It enhances immediate profitability and aligns with shared values. 
(d) 
It streamlines administrative processes and aligns with value chain 
analysis. 
(ii)  
How does Swasthya counter the risk posed by constant innovations and 
disruptions in their areas of expertise? 
(a) 
By aggressively acquiring innovative startups. 
(b) 
By introducing value-added services like telemedicine and wellness 
programs. 
(c) 
By downsizing their operations. 
(d) 
By focusing exclusively on urban healthcare markets. 
(iii)  Why is the McKinsey 7S model significant in Swasthya's strategic 
management approach, and which elements of the model ensure a holistic 
alignment of their strategy? 
(a) 
It facilitates short-term profit maximization, with a focus on structure 
and style. 
(b) 
It emphasizes a compartmentalized approach to strategy, focusing on 
shared values and skills. 
(c) 
It ensures a comprehensive alignment of strategy, structure, systems, 
shared values, skills, style, and staff. 
(d) 
It prioritizes immediate cost reduction by aligning systems and strategy. 
(iv)  Why is the focus on local operations essential for Swasthya in the context of 
their long-term objective, and how does it contribute to their overall strategy? 
(a) 
It reduces strategic risk by minimizing the need for strategic risk 
assessment. 
(b) 
It aligns with their commitment to immediate profitability. 
(c) 
It translates the organization's vision into tangible outcomes and aligns 
with their long-term objective. 
(d) 
It diversifies their portfolio and aligns with competitive landscape 
analysis. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 88>>
 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
CS.8 
(v)  
The case talks about scrutiny of every facet of the healthcare journey and also 
emphasizes the fact that people of the organization play a pivotal role in this 
journey. Based on your reading, which level of management has the most 
crucial part to play here to ensure the sense of customer-first is imbibed in 
the organization? 
(a) 
Top Management (C-Suite) which sets the tone and strategy of the 
organization 
(b) 
Middle Management (Divisional Managers) who have the responsibility 
of translating strategy to real-time objectives 
(c) 
Functional Managers who actually do the work on the field 
(d) 
Board of Directors who are responsible for wealth creation of the 
shareholders 
Answers 
(i) 
(b) 
(ii) 
(b) 
(iii) 
(c) 
(iv) 
(c) 
(v) 
(b) 
Case Scenario 4 
Once upon a time in the land of sun, sand, and vibrant cultures, there existed a 
company named "MuseoGoa" - a company that managed museums in the beautiful 
state of Goa. MuseoGoa had a vision to celebrate the rich history and culture of 
Goa, but their journey was not without its fair share of challenges. 
MuseoGoa had chosen a picturesque location in a quaint village to build their first 
museum. However, this initial enthusiasm was met with an uproar from the local 
communities. The villagers were concerned about the impact on their way of life 
and traditions. They worried that the influx of tourists might disrupt their peaceful 
existence. 
To address this challenge, MuseoGoa applied Mendelow's matrix, identifying the 
local communities as key stakeholders. They decided to engage in open dialogues, 
understanding and respecting the villagers' concerns. MuseoGoa initiated 
community-building activities, such as involving locals in museum operations, 
supporting local artisans, and organizing cultural events that showcased the 
village's heritage. Slowly but steadily, the company transformed from being 
perceived as a threat to a valued partner within the community. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 89>>
 
 
CS.9 
CASE SCENARIOS 
While MuseoGoa had successfully resolved their initial issues with the local 
community, they faced another challenge. Their location, although idyllic, was a bit 
off the beaten path. Tourists typically preferred the bustling beaches closer to the 
city, and this posed a real challenge. MuseoGoa decided to employ a pricing 
strategy. They priced their tickets affordably, significantly cheaper than the city's 
attractions. This strategy attracted budget-conscious tourists who were looking for 
unique experiences in Goa without burning a hole in their pockets. As word spread 
about the cultural gem tucked away in the village, visitors started flocking in, drawn 
not just by the museum's charm but also the economical ticket prices. 
In the age of social media, MuseoGoa knew that word-of-mouth was no longer 
limited to whispers. They tapped into the power of social media to promote their 
unique museum experience. MuseoGoa ran interactive campaigns, encouraging 
visitors to share their experiences on various platforms. One particular Instagram 
post featuring a vibrant Goan mural in the museum went viral. This was the turning 
point. The picture-perfect aesthetics of the museum attracted influencers, bloggers, 
and travel enthusiasts, making MuseoGoa a social media sensation. Visitors came 
pouring in, not just from India but from across the globe, eager to capture their 
own moments at the "Instagrammable Museum of Goa." 
With success came ambition. MuseoGoa decided to expand its footprint beyond 
Goa. To guide this expansion, they conducted a strategy audit and trend analysis. 
They identified emerging cultural and tourism trends and found potential markets 
in Pune and Trivandrum. 
In Pune, MuseoGoa curated a special exhibition that celebrated the fusion of Goan 
and Maharashtrian cultures. They strategically partnered with local influencers and 
travel agencies to market the new experience. The expansion into Pune was met 
with resounding success. 
For Trivandrum, MuseoGoa recognized the importance of local traditions and the 
distinct flavor of Kerala. They tailored their offerings to harmonize with the regional 
culture. MuseoGoa became the gateway for tourists to explore Kerala's rich 
heritage, with the museum acting as a bridge between Goa and Kerala's cultural 
tapestry. 
MuseoGoa's journey from initial uproar to expansion was a testament to their 
commitment to community building, strategic pricing, social media savvy, and a 
keen eye for trends. The company continued to flourish, celebrating the diverse 
cultural tapestry of India and making history come alive in every location they 
touched. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 90>>
 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
CS.10 
Based on the above Case Scenario, answer the Multiple Choice Questions. 
(i)  
Which strategic management concept did MuseoGoa use to address the 
initial concerns of the local community? 
(a) 
SWOT analysis 
(b) 
Mendelow's matrix 
(c) 
Cost leadership strategy 
(d) 
Porter's Five Forces model 
(ii)  
MuseoGoa's idyllic location in a quaint village posed a challenge as tourists 
preferred beaches closer to the city. To attract visitors, MuseoGoa priced their 
tickets affordably, cheaper than city attractions, drawing budget-conscious 
tourists looking for unique experiences. What business strategy did 
MuseoGoa employ to attract more tourists? 
(a)  
Cost leadership strategy 
(b)  
Differentiation strategy 
(c)  
Focus strategy 
(d)  
Diversification strategy 
(iii)  How did MuseoGoa approach its expansion into new markets such as Pune 
and Trivandrum? 
(a) 
Outsourcing strategy 
(b) 
Franchising strategy 
(c) 
Product diversification strategy 
(d) 
Market development strategy  
(iv) 
Which element of the 7S McKinsey model is demonstrated by MuseoGoa's 
strategic use of social media and pricing strategies to attract visitors? 
(a)  
Style 
(b)  
Strategy 
(c)  
Shared Values 
(d)  
Skills 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 91>>
 
 
CS.11 
CASE SCENARIOS 
(v)  
What played a crucial role in MuseoGoa's success in Pune and Trivandrum? 
(a)  
Strategic partnerships 
(b)  
Aggressive advertising 
(c)  
Product differentiation 
(d)  
Vertical integration  
Answers 
(i) 
(b) 
(ii) 
(a) 
(iii) 
(d) 
(iv) 
(b) 
(v) 
(a) 
Case Scenario 5 
Connect Innovations Pvt. Ltd., a Mumbai-based technology company, is entering 
the competitive landscape of the Indian smartphone market under its brand name 
"Poppy." The company is well aware of the influx of Chinese manufacturers 
dominating the smartphone industry. Given the recent global sentiment shift due 
to the COVID-19 pandemic, Connect Innovations plans to position Poppy as a 
patriotic choice, proudly promoting it as the "Desi" smartphone of India. 
The company's strategic arm conducted a thorough industry analysis, revealing that 
Chinese brands had completely captured the budget phone segment. However, 
there was still an untapped opportunity in the lower segment of smartphones. To 
address this, Connect Innovations is introducing two models: Poppy A and Poppy 
B, priced at ` 4,499 and ` 5,499, respectively. 
Recognizing the risk of imitation by competitors, Connect Innovations has 
assembled a team of marketing professionals to devise a strategy. Their proposed 
solution is to capitalize on the first-mover advantage by investing significant sums 
in advertising and promotions. 
Additionally, to safeguard their business from potential disruption, Connect 
Innovations decided to expand their product line to include "desi" themed 
smartphone covers and accessories alongside Poppy smartphones. They made 
substantial investments in the manufacturing of these accessories. The company's 
investors set a target of achieving annual sales volumes of 15,000 handsets and 
70,000 pieces of accessories. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 92>>
 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
CS.12 
While the accessory sales exceeded expectations, Poppy A and Poppy B did not 
receive the anticipated response. As a result, the leadership has decided to shift 
their focus, scaling back on smartphone production and concentrating primarily on 
the accessories business. 
With this new direction, the "Desi" tag remains vital for success. Connect 
Innovations aims to establish strong barriers to entry for other domestic players. 
They plan to ramp up production significantly, driving down unit costs and enabling 
cost leadership through volume. 
Based on the above case scenario, answer the multiple choice questions. 
(i) 
Connect Innovations Pvt. Ltd. entered a saturated market for smartphones, 
after a due market study of understanding the competitive landscape. Put the 
below steps in correct sequence of understanding the competitive landscape. 
I. 
Understanding the competitors 
II. 
Determining strengths and weaknesses of the competitors 
III. 
Identify the competitors 
IV. 
Put all information gathered together             
(a)  
(I),(III),(II),(IV) 
(b) 
(III),(I),(II),(IV) 
(c) 
(II),(III),(IV),(I) 
(d) 
(I),(III),(II),(IV) 
(ii) 
In which stage of strategic management are such annual objectives especially 
important? 
(a) 
Formulation 
(b) 
Control 
(c) 
Evaluation 
(d) 
Implementation 
(iii) 
The decision of Connect Innovations to shift to a new core business with a 
focus on more profitable ventures falls under which category of business 
strategy? 
(a) 
Retrenchment strategy 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 93>>
 
 
CS.13 
CASE SCENARIOS 
(b) 
Strategic alliance 
(c) 
Diversification strategy 
(d) 
Market development 
(iv) 
Considering the results from the market, which category of BCG's growth 
share matrix does the accessories business of Connect Innovations fall into? 
(a) 
Star 
(b) 
Question mark 
(c) 
Cash cow 
(d) 
Dog 
(v) 
In phase two of shifting the business focus to peripheral accessories 
production, Connect Innovations has planned to implement which barrier to 
discourage potential competitors? 
(a) 
Capital requirement 
(b) 
Product differentiation 
(c) 
Access to distribution channels 
(d) 
Economies of scale 
Answer  
(i) 
(b) 
(ii) 
(d) 
(iii) 
(a) 
(iv) 
(c) 
(v) 
(d) 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
