<<PAGE 1>>
 
 
 
  
CHAPTER 
2 
 
 
 
 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 
  
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: 
 
 
EXTERNAL  
 
 
ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
 
After studying this chapter, you will be able to: 
♦ 
Examine the criticality of the business environment in strategic analysis.   
♦ 
Describe various elements of the domestic macro environment of 
business.  
♦ 
Utilise PESTLE Analysis as a tool for environmental analysis. 
♦ 
Situate a business in an industry and conduct industry analysis.  
♦ 
Analyse aspects related to competition in the industry with reference to 
Porter’s five competitive forces. 
 
Environmental analysis is the process by which strategists monitor the 
economic, 
governmental/legal, 
market/ 
competitive, 
supplier 
/ 
technological, geographic and social settings to determine opportunities 
and threats to their firms.  
    William F. Glueck 
The analysis is the critical starting point of strategic thinking. Kenichi Ohmae 
 
 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 2>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.2 
 
 
 
2.1 
INTRODUCTION 
There are different kinds of business activities that take place in an organisational 
setting, and a cursory look into their world reflects a wide variety of organisations 
ranging from small local businesses to international or multinational corporations’ 
level. Generally, organisations are distinguished based on their size, type of 
products, markets, geographical coverage, legal status, and like because of vast 
organisational diversity.  
Whatever their size or other distinguishing feature they do not operate in a vacuum. 
They continuously act and react to what happens outside their periphery. The 
factors that are outside the business operations are typically referred to as 
organisational / business environment. In other words, and in the specific context 
of business, environment may be defined as a set of all external factors that weigh 
in the minds of the managers. Drawing an analogy with the term ‘atmosphere’ one 
could envision layers of such influences. See Figure- 
Strategic Analysis - External 
Environment
Strategic Analysis
Strategy and Business Environment
Understanding Product and 
Industry
Industry Environment Analysis
Market and Customer
Competitive Strategy
CHAPTER OVERVIEW 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 3>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.3 
 
The process of strategic formulation begins with a strategic analysis. Its objective 
is to compile information about internal and external environments in order to 
assess possibilities while formulating strategic objectives and contemplating 
strategic activities. In this chapter various aspects of external environment are 
covered with the perspective of strategic analysis. We will also attempt to 
understand how to identify, and tackle strategies to adapt within complex and 
turbulent external environment. 
2.2 
STRA
GIC ANALYSIS 
Strategy formulation is not a task in which managers can get by with intuition, 
opinions, instincts, and creative thinking. Judgments about what strategies to 
pursue need to flow directly from analysis of a firm’s external environment and its 
internal resources and capabilities. Environmental scanning is a natural and 
continuous activity for every  business and some do it on an informal basis, while 
International Politico-legal, 
Socio-cultural,  Economic, 
Decomgrpahic,  Ecological 
and Teachnological 
Environment
Domestic Politico-legal, 
Socio-cultural, Economic, 
Decomgrpahic,  Ecological 
and Teachnological 
Environment 
Industry shaping 
competitive force
Firm's 
stakeholders
Firm's Internal 
Environment
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 4>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.4 
others have a formal structure to collect meaningful information. It is just as 
important to learn about changes in tax regulations through television news as it 
is through a well-established reading material from experts. The capacity to collect 
important information in informal settings usually separates great entrepreneurs 
and managers. Using just informal techniques, on the other hand, exposes the 
organisation to missed opportunities and unanticipated hazards. A systematic 
approach to environmental assessment is essential for managing risk and 
uncertainty. 
The majority of the rapidly expanding organisations use strategic planning 
throughout various stages of their operations. The strategic analysis is a component 
of business planning that has a methodical approach, makes the right resource 
investments, and may assist business in achieving its objective. It forces to think 
about the rivals and aids in the evaluation of business plans to stay ahead of the 
competition.  The two important situational considerations are: 
(1)  
industry and competitive conditions, and  
(2) 
an organisation’s own capabilities, resources, internal strengths, weaknesses, 
and market position. 
Figure: Strategic Analysis 
The analytical sequence is from strategic appraisal of the external and internal 
situation to evaluation of alternatives of strategies, to the final choice of strategy. 
  
Evaluation 
Current 
Vision 
Mission 
Goals 
Strategies 
Identify 
Strength, 
Weakness 
Internal 
Analysis 
Identify 
Opportunity, 
Threats 
External 
Analysis 
 Analysis 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 5>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.5 
Accurate diagnosis of the business situation is necessary for managerial 
preparation to decide on a sound long-term direction, setting appropriate 
objectives, and crafting a winning strategy. Without perceptive understanding of 
the strategic aspects of a company’s external and internal environments, the 
chances are greatly increased that managers will finalize a strategic game plan that 
doesn’t fit the situation well, that holds little prospect for building competitive 
advantage, and that is unlikely to boost company performance. 
The strategic analysis is a continuous process which is not without limitations. There 
are two major limitations of strategic analysis that we need to be aware of. First, it 
gives a lot of innovative options but doesn't tell which one to pick. The options can 
be overlapping, confusing or difficult to implement. Second, it can be time-
consuming at times, hurting overall organisational functioning and also strain other 
efficient innovations such as developing a new product or a service. 
2.2.1 Issues to consider for Strategic Analysis  
Strategy evolves over a period of time: Each strategic decision must balance the 
different factors that impact and constrain strategy. A key element of strategic 
analysis is the probable outcomes of everyday decisions. A current strategy is the 
result of several little choices taken over a protracted period of time. A 
management radically changes strategy when they try to speed up the 
organisational growth. Strategy is influenced by experience, but it has to be 
updated when the results become clear. It therefore evolves with time. 
Balance of external and internal factors: In practise, strategic analysis 
necessitates creating a reasonable balance between many and conflicting 
challenges, because a perfect fit between them is unlikely. Management must 
consider opportunities, influences, and constraints while taking a strategic decision. 
There are factors driving a decision, such as entering a new market. Concurrently, 
there exist constraints that limit the option, such as the presence of a large 
opponent. These limiting constraints will have various implications on the kind, 
degree, volume, and significance of the impact. While some of these aspects are 
under your control, there will be others way beyond the existing capabilities. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 6>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.6 
Risk: In strategic analysis, the principle of maintaining balance is important. 
However, the complexity and intermingling of variables in the environment reduces 
the strategic balance in the organisation. Competitive markets, liberalization, 
globalization, booms, recessions, technological advancements, inter-country 
relationships all affect businesses and pose risk at varying degrees. An important 
aspect of strategic analysis is to identify potential imbalances or risks and assess 
their consequences. A broad classification of the strategic risk that requires 
consideration in strategic analysis is given below: 
 
 
Time 
 
 
Short Time 
Long Time 
Strategic Risks 
External 
Errors in interpreting the 
environment 
cause 
strategic failure 
 
Changes in the environment 
lead 
to 
obsolescence 
of 
strategy. 
Internal 
Organizational capacity is 
unable to cope up with 
strategic demands. 
 
Inconsistencies 
with 
the 
strategy are developed on 
account of changes in internal 
capacities and preferences 
                          Figure: Strategic Risk 
External risk is on account of inconsistencies between strategies and the forces in 
the environment. Internal risk occurs on account of forces that are either within the 
organization or are directly interacting with the organization on a routine basis. 
The below given broad list of analysis that a business undertakes to plan a strategy 
covers both aspects of external analysis and internal analysis. An analysis helps 
identify opportunities, threats, strengths and weaknesses. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 7>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.7 
Strategic Analysis 
External Analysis 
Customer Analysis: Segments, 
motivations, unmet needs.  
Competitor Analysis: Strategic groups, 
performance, objectives, strategies, 
culture, cost structure.  
Market Analysis: Size, growth, 
profitability, entry barriers.  
Environmental Analysis: Technological, 
government, economic, cultural, 
demographic. 
Internal Analysis 
Performance Analysis: Profitability, 
sales, customer satisfaction, product 
qualify, relative cost, new products, 
human resources.   
Determinants Analysis: Past and 
current strategies, strategic problems, 
organizational Capabilities and 
constraints, financial resources, 
strengths, and weaknesses. 
 
 
Opportunities, threats, trends,  
and 
Strategic uncertainties 
Strategic strengths, weaknesses, 
problems, constraints, and 
uncertainties 
 
 
Strategy Identification & Selection 
♦ Identify strategic alternatives 
♦ Select strategy 
♦ Implement the operating plan 
♦ Review strategies 
Figure: Framework of Strategic Analysis 
It is evident that industries differ widely in their economic characteristics, 
competitive situations, and future profit prospects. The economic character of 
industries varies according to such factors as overall size and market growth rate, 
the pace of technological change, the geographic boundaries of the market (which 
can extend from local to worldwide), the number and size of buyers and sellers, 
whether sellers’ products are virtually identical or highly differentiated, the extent 
to which costs are affected by economies of scale, and the types of distribution 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 8>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.8 
channels used to access buyers, marketing opportunities, disposable income of 
prospective buyers, government support, etc. Competitive forces can be moderate 
in one industry and fierce, even cutthroat, in another. In some industries 
competition focuses on who has the best price, while in others competition is 
centered on quality and reliability (as in monitors for PCs and laptops) or product 
features and performance (as in mobile phones) or quick service and convenience. 
(as in online shopping and fast foods) or brand reputation (as in laundry detergents 
and soft drinks). In other industries, the challenge is for companies to work 
cooperatively with suppliers, customers, and maybe even select competitors to 
create the next round of product innovations and open up whole new vistas of 
market opportunities.  
An industry’s economic traits and competitive conditions, and how they are 
expected to change, determine whether its profit prospects are poor, average, or 
excellent. Industry and competitive conditions differ so much that leading 
companies in unattractive industries can find it hard to earn respectable profits, 
while even weak companies in attractive industries can achieve good performance. 
2.3 
STRATEGY AND BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT  
To accomplish the goals and objectives of a business, business strategist creates 
strategies and formulate policies considering both internal and external factors. A 
framework for adjusting to the demands of an unpredictable environment and an 
uncertain future is provided by strategic management.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure: Strategy and Environment 
The business environment is highly dynamic and continuously evolving. Strategists 
provide an interface between the organizational abilities and the opportunities and 
challenges it must deal within the larger environment.  
 
  
Management 
Strategy 
Environment 
Resources 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 9>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.9 
The term "business environment" refers to all external factors, influences, or 
situations that in some way affect business decisions, plans, and operations. 
Organisational success is determined by its business environment, and even more 
from its relationship with it. 
Strategic management is involved with choosing a long-term direction in relation 
to these resources and opportunities. There is a close and continuous interaction 
between a business and its environment. This interaction helps in strengthening 
the business firm and using its resources more effectively. It helps the business in 
the following ways: 
i. 
Determine opportunities and threats: The interaction between the business 
and its environment would explain opportunities and threats to the business. 
It helps to find new needs and wants of the consumers, changes in laws, 
changes in social behaviours, and tells what new products the competitors are 
bringing in the market to attract consumers. 
ii. 
Give direction for growth: The interaction with the environment enables the 
business to identify the areas for growth and expansion of their activities. Once 
the business is aware and understands the changes happening around, it can 
plan and strategise to have successful business. 
iii. 
Continuous Learning: The managers are motivated to continuously update 
their knowledge, understanding and skills to meet the predicted changes in 
the realm of business. 
iv. 
Image 
Building: 
Environmental 
understanding 
helps 
the 
business 
organizations to improve their image by showing their sensitivity to the 
environment in which they operate. For example, in view of the shortage of 
power, many companies have set up captive power plants with their factories 
to meet their own requirement of power as well as extend surplus capacities 
in the vicinity. Understanding the needs of the environment help to showcase 
that the business is aware and responsive to the needs. It creates a positive 
image and helps it to prosper and win over the competitors. 
v. 
Meeting Competition: It helps the businesses to analyse the competitors’ 
strategies and formulate their own strategies accordingly. The idea is to 
flourish and beat competition for its products and services. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 10>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.10 
Business strategies relate organisational resources to challenges and opportunities 
in the larger environment. The changes happening in the external environment 
challenge organisations to find novel and unique strategies to remain in business 
and succeed. As the world is getting smaller and competition is increasing, 
organisations have an increasing pressure to develop their businesses and 
strengthen their competitiveness. Strategic analysis covering internal and external 
environment is highly relevant and important for the strategists in organisations in 
order to achieve competitive advantage, as well as ensure high performance for 
survival and growth. 
To flourish, a business must be aware of, assess, and respond to the many 
opportunities and threats present in its environment. In order to succeed, the business 
must not only be aware of the numerous aspects of its surroundings but also be able 
to handle and adapt to them. The business must continuously evaluate its 
environment and modify its operations in order to thrive and expand. 
Strategic decisions are significant aspects of business management and are 
essential for the success and continued existence. Two crucial aspects for the 
success include are the function of top management and the method of 
formulating strategic decisions. Improvement of strategic decisions is constant 
endeavour for strategist. Due to the contemporary environment's changes and the 
challenges that managers must overcome when making decisions, there is interest 
in enhancing strategic decision-making. The environment is far more dynamic and 
unpredictable than it used to be. 
2.3.1 Micro and Macro Environment 
The environment in which an organization exists can be described in terms of the 
opportunities and threats operating in the external environment apart from the 
strengths and weaknesses existing in the internal environment. Business strategists 
should always be adequately informed on developments occurring in their 
company, its industry, and within micro and macro environment of business. For 
making any strategic decision, they should be able to comprehend the facts 
available and challenge the underlying assumptions.  
The external environment can be categorised in two major types as follows: 
♦ 
Micro environment 
♦ 
Macro environment 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 11>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.11 
Micro-environment is related to small area or immediate periphery of an 
organization. It influences an organization regularly and directly. Micro 
environment consists of suppliers, consumers, marketing intermediaries, 
competitors, etc. These are specific to the said business or firm and affect its 
working on a direct and regular basis. Within the micro or the immediate 
environment in which a firm operates we need to address the following issues: 
♦ 
The employees of the firm, their characteristics and how they are organised. 
♦ 
The existing customer base on which the firm relies for business. 
♦ 
The ways in which the firm can raise its finance. 
♦ 
Who are the firm suppliers and how are the links between the two being 
developed? 
♦ 
The local community within which the firm operates. 
♦ 
The direct competition and their comparative performance. 
The factors in micro environment often relate an organization to the macro issues 
influencing the way a firm reacts in the market place. The macro environment is the 
portion of the outside world that significantly affects how an organisation operates 
but is typically much beyond its direct control and influence. 
2.3.2 Elements of Macro Environment 
Macro environment has broader dimensions as it consists of economic, socio-
cultural, technological, political and legal factors. The classification of the relevant 
environment into components or sectors helps an organization to cope with its 
complexity, comprehend the different influences operating, and relating the 
environmental changes to its strategic management process.  
“The environment includes factors outside the firm which can lead to 
opportunities for, or threats to the firm. Although, there are many factors, the 
most important of the factors are socio-economic, technological, supplier, 
competitors, and government.” 
 
 
 
 
Gluek and Jauch 
The external environment of an organisation is made up of all the individuals, 
teams, organisations, agencies, and factors that it routinely interacts with when 
conducting business. In addition to carrying out transactions, it develops and puts 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 12>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.12 
into action pertinent plans and policies to address environmental changes. It 
negotiates its way into the future as well. 
Demographic Environment 
Demographics are the characteristics of a population that have been classified and 
explained according to certain criteria, such age, gender, and income, in order to 
understand the features of a specific group. Demographical analysis considers 
factors such as race, age, income, education, possession of assets, house ownership, 
job position, region, and the degree of education. Data about these qualities across 
homes and within a demographic variable are of importance to both businesses 
and economists. Marketers and other social scientists regularly divide up 
populations based on their demographic makeup. India has relatively younger 
population as compared to many other countries. Many multinationals are 
interested in India considering its population size.  
Considering demographics is of immense importance for any business. Business 
Organizations need to study different demographic factors.  Particularly, they need 
to address following issues: 
♦ 
What demographic trends will affect the market size of the industry? 
♦ 
What demographic trends represent opportunities or threats?  
The size, age distribution, geographic dispersion, ethnic mix, and income 
distribution of a population are all of great importance to the organisation. 
Identifying the implications of changing demographic characteristics or population 
components for a future strategic competitiveness is often a challenge for 
strategists. 
Socio-Cultural Environment 
A general factor that influences almost all enterprises in a similar manner. It 
represents a complex group of factors such as social traditions, values and beliefs, 
level and standards of literacy, the ethical standards and state of society, the extent 
of social stratification, conflict, cohesiveness and so forth. It differs from 
demographics in the sense that it is not the characteristics of the population, but it 
is the behaviour and the belief system of that population.  
Socio-cultural environment consists of factors related to human relationships and 
the impact of social attitudes and cultural values which has bearing on the 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 13>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.13 
operations of the organization. The beliefs, values and norms of a society determine 
how individuals and organizations should be interrelated. The core beliefs of a 
particular society tend to be persistent. It is difficult for a business to change these 
core values, which becomes a determinant of its functioning. This means, that 
businesses have to adjust to social norms and beliefs to operate successfully. The 
social environment primarily affects the strategic management process within the 
organization in the areas of mission and objective setting, and decisions related to 
products and markets.  
Economic Environment 
Economic conditions have a direct bearing over the business strategies. The 
economic environment refers to the overall economic situation around the business 
and include conditions at the regional, national and global levels. It encompasses 
conditions in the markets for resources that have an effect on the supply of inputs 
and outputs of the business, their costs, and the dependability, quality, and 
availability.  
Economic environment determines the strength and size of the market. The 
purchasing power in an economy depends on current income, prices, savings, 
circulation of money, debt and credit availability. Income distribution pattern 
determine the business possibilities. The important point to consider is to find out 
the effect of economic prospect, growth and inflation on the operations of the 
business.  
Higher interest rates are detrimental for the businesses with high debt. In the real 
estate market, they reduce the capability of the prospective buyers to avail loan and 
pay instalments, thus lower the demand. 
The economic conditions of a nation refer to a set of economic factors that have 
great influence on business organizations and their operations. These include gross 
domestic product, per capita income, markets for goods and services, availability 
of capital, foreign exchange reserve, growth of foreign trade, strength of capital 
market, interest rates, disposable income, unemployment, inflation, etc. All these 
factors generally tell the state of the economy. Whether it is doing good or is it 
performing poorly. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 14>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.14 
Political-Legal Environment 
Political-legal environment takes into account elements like the general level of 
political development, the degree to which business and economic issues have 
been politicised, the degree of political morality, the state of law and order, political 
stability, the political ideology and practises of the ruling party, the effectiveness 
and purposefulness of governmental agencies, and the scope and type of 
governmental intervention in the economy and industry. It is partly general to all 
similar enterprises and partly specific to an individual enterprise.  
Business is highly guided and controlled by government policies. Hence the type 
of government running a country is a powerful influence on business. A business 
has to consider the changes in the regulatory framework and their impact on the 
business. Taxes and duties are other critical areas that may be levied and affect the 
business.   
Businesses prefer to operate in a country where there is a sound legal system. 
However, in any country businesses must have a good working knowledge of the 
major laws protecting consumers, competitions and organizations. Businesses must 
understand the relevant laws relating to companies, competition, intellectual 
property, foreign exchange, labour and so on. 
Nationalism supports measures aimed at enhancing the position of a country in 
International business. Presently, there is immense thrust on nationalism in Indian 
business through policies like Make in India and Aatmanirbhar Bharat. Production 
Linked Incentives scheme, another step in the direction, rewards businesses for 
increased sales of goods produced domestically. The scheme encourages foreign 
businesses to open businesses in India, and at the same time incentivises domestic 
businesses to open or expand their manufacturing facilities, create more jobs, and 
lessen India's reliance on imports. 
Technological Environment 
A highly important factor in the present times is technology. Technology has 
changed the way people communicate and do things. Technology has also changed 
the ways of how businesses operate now. Technology and business are linked and 
are interdependent on one another. Businesses help society access the outcomes 
of technological research and development, raising everyone's standard of living. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 15>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.15 
As a result, business leverages technology. Businesses use new discoveries to adapt 
themselves for the advancement of society.  
Technology has impacted on how businesses are conducted. With use of 
technology, many organisations are able to reduce paperwork, schedule payments 
more efficiently, are able to coordinate inventories efficiently and effectively. This 
helps to reduce costs of companies, and shrink time and distance, thus, capturing 
a competitive advantage for the company.  
Changes in technology have an effect on how a business runs its operations. The 
technological advancements might require a business to drastically alter its 
operational, production and marketing strategies. 
Technology is leading to many new business opportunities as well as making 
obsolete most of the existing business products and services. Technology can act 
as opportunity, when a business effectively adopts technological innovations to 
their strategic advantage. However, at the same time technology can act as a threat 
too. Artificial intelligence, machine learning, robotic process automation is some of 
the new technological tools that businesses are adopting and can act as both 
opportunity and threat to a business.  
2.3.3 PESTLE– A tool to Analyse Macro Environment 
The term PESTLE is often used to describe a framework for analysis of macro 
environmental factors. PESTEL analysis is frequently used to assess the business 
environment in which a firm operates. Political, economic, social, and technological 
(PEST) analysis was the name given to the framework in the past; however, later, 
the framework has been expanded to include environmental and legal factors as 
well. PESTLE analysis involves identifying the political, economic, socio-cultural, 
technological, legal and environmental influences on an organization and providing 
a way of scanning the environmental influences that have affected or are likely to 
affect an organization or its policy.  
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 16>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.16 
‘PESTLE analysis is an increasingly used and recognized analytical tool, and it is an 
acronym for: 
P- political 
E- economic 
S- socio-cultural 
T- technological 
L- legal 
E- environmental 
The PESTLE analysis is simple to understand and quick to implement. The advantage 
of this tool is that it encourages management into proactive and structured 
thinking in its decision making. 
The Key Factors 
♦ 
Political factors are how and to what extent the government intervenes in 
the economy and the activities of business firms. Political factors may also 
influence goods and services which the government wants to provide or be 
provided and those that the government does not want to be provided. 
Furthermore, governments have great influence on the health, education and 
infrastructure of a nation. 
♦ 
Economic factors have major impacts on how businesses operate and take 
decisions. For example, interest rates affect a firm's cost of capital and 
therefore to what extent a business grows and expands. Exchange rates affect 
the costs of exporting goods and the supply and price of imported goods in 
an economy. The money supply, inflation, credit flow, per capita income, 
growth rates have a bearing on the business decisions. 
♦ 
Social factors affect the demand for a company's products and how that 
company operates. 
♦ 
Technological factors can determine barriers to entry, minimum efficient 
production level and influence outsourcing decisions. Furthermore, 
technological shifts can affect costs, quality, and lead to innovation. 
♦ 
Legal factors affect how a company operates, its costs, and the demand for 
its products, ease of business. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 17>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.17 
♦ 
Environmental factors affect industries such as tourism, farming, and 
insurance. Growing awareness to climate change is affecting how companies 
operate and the products they offer--it is both creating new markets and 
diminishing or destroying existing ones. 
On the basis of these, it should be possible to identify a number of key 
environmental influences, which are in effect, the drivers of change. These are the 
factors that require to be considered in making meaningful decisions. Take a look 
at the table given below: 
Political 
Economic 
♦ 
Political stability 
♦ 
Political principles and ideologies 
♦ 
Current and future taxation policy 
♦ 
Regulatory bodies and processes 
♦ 
Government policies 
♦ 
Government term and change 
♦ 
Thrust areas of political leaders 
♦ 
Economy situation and trends 
♦ 
Market and trade cycles 
♦ 
Specific industry factors 
♦ 
Customer/end-user drivers 
♦ 
Interest and exchange rates 
♦ 
Inflation and unemployment 
♦ 
Strength of consumer spending 
Social 
Technological 
♦ 
Lifestyle trends 
♦ 
Demographics 
♦ 
Consumer attitudes and opinions 
♦ 
Brand, 
company, 
technology 
image 
♦ 
Consumer buying patterns 
♦ 
Ethnic/religious factors 
♦ 
Media views and perception 
♦ 
Replacement 
technology/solutions 
♦ 
Maturity of technology 
♦ 
Manufacturing 
maturity 
and 
capacity 
♦ 
Innovation potential 
♦ 
Technology access, licensing, 
patents, property rights and 
copyrights 
Legal 
Environmental 
♦ 
Business and Corporate Laws 
♦ 
Employment Law 
♦ 
Competition Law 
♦ 
Health & Safety Law 
♦ 
International Treaty and Law 
♦ 
Regional Legislation 
♦ 
Ecological/environmental issues 
♦ 
Environmental hazards 
♦ 
Environmental legislation 
♦ 
Energy consumption 
♦ 
Waste disposal 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 18>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.18 
2.3.4 Internationalization of Business  
Internationalization has emerged as the dominant commercial trend over the last 
couple of decades. It enables a business to enter new markets in search of greater 
earnings and less expensive resources. Additionally, expanding internationally 
enable a business to achieve greater economies of scale and extend the lifespan of 
its products.  
The strategic-management process is essentially the same for global firms as it is 
for domestic firms; nevertheless, international processes are much more 
complicated due to additional variables and linkages. A business can approach 
internationalisation systemically with the aid of international strategy planning. 
One method for an organization to identify opportunities and threats in global 
markets is by scanning the external environment. The development of effective 
strategies and the formulation of global strategic objectives are made feasible by 
internationalisation. 
Characteristics of a global business 
To be specific, a global business has three characteristics: 
♦ 
It is a conglomerate of multiple units (located in different parts of the globe) 
but all linked by common ownership. 
♦ 
Multiple units draw on a common pool of resources, such as money, credit, 
information, patents, trade names and control systems. 
♦ 
The units respond to some common strategy. Besides, its managers and 
shareholders are also based in different nations. 
Developing internationally 
International development is expensive and challenging. Moving on in a thorough 
and structured manner is thus the ideal approach to adopt.  The steps in 
international strategic planning are as follows: 
♦ 
Evaluate global opportunities and threats and rate them with the internal 
capabilities. 
♦ 
Describe the scope of the firm's global commercial operations. 
♦ 
Create the firm's global business objectives. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 19>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.19 
♦ 
Develop distinct corporate strategies for the global business and whole 
organisation. 
Why do businesses go global? 
Technological developments and evolving political views are two important factors 
in the rapid rise of multinational organisations. Because of technological advances, 
the process of internationalisation is now simpler than it was previously. Worldwide 
communication makes it easier to define and implement global strategy by linking 
corporate headquarters with their abroad operations. In addition, introduction of 
improved transportation has increased the mobility of money, people, raw 
materials, and finished items. There are several reasons why companies go global. 
These are explained as follows: 
♦ 
The first and foremost reason is the need to grow.  It is basic need of every 
organisation. Often finding opportunities in the other parts of the globe,      
organisations extend their businesses and globalise their operations. 
♦ 
There is rapid shrinking of time and distance across the globe, because of 
faster communication, speedier transportation, growing financial flow of funds 
and rapid technological changes. 
♦ 
It is being realised that the domestic markets are no longer adequate. The 
competition present domestically may not exist in some of the international 
markets. 
♦ 
There can be varied other reasons such as need for reliable or cheaper source 
of raw-materials, cheap labour, etc. Many foreign businesses shift and set up 
some of their operations to take advantage of availability of vast pool of talent. 
♦ 
Companies often set up overseas plants to reduce high transportation costs. 
It may be cheaper to produce near the market to reduce the time and costs 
involved in transportation. 
♦ 
When exporting organisations find foreign markets to open up or grow big, 
they may naturally look at overseas manufacturing plants and sales branches 
to generate higher sales and better cash flow.  
♦ 
The rise of services to constitute the largest single sector in the world 
economy; and regional economic integration, which has involved both the 
world’s largest economies as well as certain developing economies. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 20>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.20 
♦ 
The apparent and real collapse of international trade barriers redefines the 
roles of state and industry. The trend is towards increased privatization of 
manufacturing and services sectors, less government interference in business 
decisions and more dependence on the value-added sector to gain 
marketplace competitiveness. The trade tariffs and custom barriers are getting 
lowered, resulting in increased flow of business. 
♦ 
Globalization has made companies in different countries to form strategic 
alliances to ward off economic and technological threats and leverage their 
respective comparative and competitive advantages.  
2.3.5 International Environment 
The social, cultural, demographic, environmental, political, governmental, legal, 
technological factors that an international organisation faces are nearly limitless, 
and the number and complexity of these factors increase manifold as the number 
of products produced and geographic areas served increase. An assessment of the 
external environment is the first step toward internationalisation. Analysing 
international environment is important since it allows organisation to discover 
opportunities in the global market and evaluate feasibilities of capitalising on these 
opportunities. Assessments of the international environment can be done at three 
levels: multinational, regional, and country. 
Multinational environmental analysis involves identifying, anticipating, and 
monitoring significant components of the global environment on a large scale. 
Understanding global developments covering economic and other macro elements 
is important. Governments may have free or interventionist tendencies in 
economies that needs to be carefully considered. These characteristics are 
evaluated based on their present and expected future impact. 
Regional environmental analysis is a more in-depth evaluation of the critical 
factors in a specific geographical area. The emphasis would be on discovering 
market opportunities for a goods, services, or innovations in the chosen location. 
Country environmental analysis has to take a deeper look at the important 
environmental factors. Study of economic, legal, political, and cultural dimensions 
is required in order for planning to be successful. The analysis must be customised 
for each of the countries to develop effective market entrance strategies. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 21>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.21 
International environment has become an inherent part of strategic management 
for businesses of all sizes  with global interests. It essentially involves various global 
aspects like political risks, cultural differences, exchange rate fluctuations, legal 
compliances and taxation issues. Thus, it becomes more important for the people 
at the decision-making levels to focus on factors comprising the international 
environment. 
2.4 
UNDERSTANDING 
PRODUCT 
AND 
 
INDUSTRY 
Businesses sell products. A product can be either a good or a service. It might be 
physical good or a service, an experience. Business products have certain 
characteristics as follows: 
♦ 
Products are either tangible or intangible. A tangible product can be handled, 
seen, and physically felt, such as a car, book, pen, table, mobile handset and 
so on. Alternatively, an intangible product is not a physical good, such as 
telecom services, banking, insurance, or repair services. 
♦ 
Product has a price. Businesses determine the cost of their products and 
charge a price for them. The dynamics of supply and demand influence the 
market price of an item or service. The market price is the price at which 
quantity provided equals quantity desired. The price that may be paid is 
determined by the market, the quality, the marketing, and the targeted group. 
In the present competitive world price is often given by the market and 
businesses have to work on costs to maintain profitability.  
On account of competition, businesses are not able to fix market price by adding 
profit margin on the costs. Rather, they work on reducing the costs given the 
prevailing market price. 
♦ 
Products have certain features that deliver satisfaction. A product feature is a 
component of a product that satisfies a consumer need. Features determine 
product pricing, and businesses alter features during the development process 
to optimise the user experience. Products should be able to provide value 
satisfaction to the customers for whom they are meant. Features of the 
product will distinguish it in terms of its function, design, quality and 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 22>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.22 
experience. A customer's cumulative experience with a product from its 
purchase to the end of its useful life is an important component of a product 
feature. 
♦ 
Product is pivotal for business. The product is at the centre of business around 
which all strategic activities revolve. The product enables production, quality, 
sales, marketing, logistics and other business processes. Product is the driving 
force behind business activities. 
♦ 
A product has a useful life. Every product has a usable life after which it must 
be replaced, as well as a life cycle after which it is to be reinvented or may 
cease to exist. We have observed that fixed line telephone instruments have 
largely been replaced by mobile phones.  
2.4.1 Product Life Cycle 
An important concept in strategic choice is that of product life cycle (PLC). It is a 
useful concept for guiding strategic choice. Essentially, PLC is an S-shaped curve 
which exhibits the relationship of sales with respect of time for a product that 
passes through the four successive stages of introduction, growth, maturity and 
decline. If businesses are substituted for product, the concept of PLC could work 
just as well.  
The first stage of PLC is the introduction stage with slow sales growth, in which 
competition is almost negligible, prices are relatively high, and markets are limited. 
The growth in sales is at a lower rate because of lack of awareness on the part of 
customers. 
The second phase of PLC is growth stage with rapid market acceptance. In the 
growth stage, the demand expands rapidly, prices fall, competition increases, and 
market expands. The customer has knowledge about the product and shows 
interest in purchasing it.  
The third phase of PLC is maturity stage where there is slowdown in growth rate. In 
this stage, the competition gets tough, and market gets stablised. Profit comes 
down because of stiff competition. At this stage, organisations have to work for 
maintaining stability. 
In the fourth stage of PLC is declines with sharp downward drift in sales. The sales 
and profits fall down sharply due to some new product replaces the existing 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 23>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.23 
product.  So, a combination of strategies can be implemented to stay in the market 
either by diversification or retrenchment. 
 
Figure: Product Life Cycle 
The main advantage of PLC approach is that it can be used to diagnose a portfolio 
of products (or businesses) in order to establish the stage at which each of them 
exists. Particular attention is to be paid on the businesses that are in the declining 
stage. Depending on the diagnosis, appropriate strategic choice can be made. For 
instance, expansion may be a feasible alternative for businesses in the introductory 
and growth stages. Mature businesses may be used as sources of cash for 
investment in other businesses which need resources. A combination of strategies 
like selective harvesting, retrenchment, etc. may be adopted for declining 
businesses. In this way, a balanced portfolio of businesses may be built up by 
exercising a strategic choice based on the PLC concept. 
2.4.2 Value Chain Analysis  
With each transaction, successful businesses produce value for their consumers in 
the form of satisfaction and profits for themselves and their shareholders. 
Companies that generate more value are more likely to profit than those that 
generate less value. Understanding value chain of an organisation is critical for 
evaluating how much value it generates. Value chain analysis is a method used by 
strategists to break down each process that their business employs. This analysis 
could be used to improve the sequence of operations, enhancing efficiency and 
creating a competitive advantage. Value chain analysis can be used by businesses 
of all sizes, from sole proprietorships to multinational organisations. Each 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 24>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.24 
organisation has a unique set of procedures to perform its duties, and they may all 
benefit from value chain analysis to evaluate and optimise their processes. 
Value chain analysis is a method of examining each activity in value chain of a 
business in order to identify areas for improvements. When you do a value chain 
analysis, you must analyse how each stage in the process adds or subtracts value 
from the end product or service. 
Value chain analysis has been widely used as a means of describing the activities 
within and around an organization and relating them to an assessment of the 
competitive strength of an organization (or its ability to provide value-for-money 
products or services). Value chain analysis was originally introduced as an 
accounting analysis to shed light on the ‘value added’ of separate steps in complex 
manufacturing processes, in order to determine where cost improvements could 
be made and/or value creation improved. The two basic steps of identifying 
separate activities and assessing the value added from each were linked to an 
analysis of an organization’s competitive advantage by Michael Porter. 
 
Figure: Value Chain (Michael Porter)  
One of the key aspects of value chain analysis is the recognition that organizations 
are much more than a random collection of machines, material, money and people. 
These resources are of no value unless deployed into activities and organised into 
systems and routines which ensure that products or services are produced which 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 25>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.25 
are valued by the final consumer/user. In other words, it is these competences to 
perform particular activities and the ability to manage linkages between activities 
which are the source of competitive advantage for organizations. Porter argued 
that an understanding of strategic capability must start with an identification of 
these separate value activities.  
The primary activities of the organization are grouped into five main areas: inbound 
logistics, operations, outbound logistics, marketing and sales, and service. 
♦ 
Inbound logistics are the activities concerned with receiving, storing and 
distributing the inputs to the product/service. This includes materials 
handling, stock control, transport etc. Like, transportation and warehousing. 
♦ 
Operations transform these inputs into the final product or service: 
machining, packaging, assembly, testing, etc. convert raw materials in finished 
goods.  
♦ 
Outbound logistics collect, store and distribute the product to customers. For 
tangible products this would be warehousing, materials handling, transport, 
etc. In the case of services, it may be more concerned with arrangements for 
bringing customers to the service, if it is a fixed location (e.g. sports events). 
♦ 
Marketing and sales provide the means whereby consumers/users are made 
aware of the product/service and are able to purchase it. This would include 
sales administration, advertising, selling and so on. In public services, 
communication networks which help users’ access a particular service are 
often important.  
♦ 
Service are all those activities, which enhance or maintain the value of a 
product/service, such as installation, repair, training and spares. 
Each of these groups of primary activities are linked to support activities. These 
can be divided into four areas; 
♦ 
Procurement: This refers to the processes for acquiring the various resource 
inputs to the primary activities (not to the resources themselves). As such, it 
occurs in many parts of the organization. 
♦ 
Technology development: All value activities have a ‘technology’, even if it is 
simply know-how. The key technologies may be concerned directly with the 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 26>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.26 
product (e.g. R&D product design) or with processes (e.g. process 
development) or with a particular resource (e.g. raw materials improvements). 
♦ 
Human resource management: This is a particularly important area which 
transcends all primary activities. It is concerned with those activities involved 
in recruiting, managing, training, developing and rewarding people within the 
organization. 
♦ 
Infrastructure: The systems of planning, finance, quality control, information 
management, etc. are crucially important to an organization’s performance in 
its primary activities. Infrastructure also consists of the structures and routines 
of the organization which sustain its culture. 
2.5 
INDUSTRY ENVIRONMENT ANALYSIS  
A combination of ideas and methodologies may be utilised to create a clear picture 
of key industry traits, competition intensity, industry change drivers, rival firms' 
market positions and tactics, competitive success, and profit forecasts. Industry 
analysis enable strategic understanding about the entire state of any industry and 
make decisions about whether the industry is a lucrative or not.  
The goal of the industry environment analysis, which is typically an important step 
of strategic analysis, is to estimate the amount of competitive pressures the 
business is presently facing and is expected to face in the near future. 
The analysis entails seeing the firm in the context of a bigger framework. The 
purpose of industrial analysis is to get insight into a wide range of elements within 
and outside the business. Analysing these elements enhances knowledge of 
surrounding and serves as the foundation for aligning strategy with changing 
industry circumstances and realities.  
2.5.1 Porter’s Five Forces Model 
Every business operates in the competitive environment. Competitive state of an 
industry applies a strong influence on how firms develop their strategies. Porter's 
Five Forces analysis is a simple but efficient way for determining the key sources of 
competition in business or industry. It is a powerful and widely used tool to 
systematically diagnose the significant competitive pressures in a market and 
assess the strength and importance of each. Understanding the variables that affect 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 27>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.27 
industry helps to adapt strategy, boost profitability, and stay ahead of the 
competition. Strategist may use a strong position to organizational advantage or 
reinforce a weak one to avoid making mistakes in the future.  
Michael Porter believes that the basic unit of analysis for understanding is a group 
of competitors producing goods or services that compete directly with each other. 
It is the industry where competitive advantage is ultimately won or lost. It is through 
competitive strategy that the organisation attempts to adopt an approach to 
compete in the industry. 
The character, mix, and intricacies of competitive forces are never the same from 
one industry to another.  The model holds that the state of competition in an 
industry is a composite of competitive pressures operating in five areas of the 
overall market: 
♦ 
Competitive pressures associated with the market manoeuvring and jockeying 
for buyer patronage that goes on among rival sellers in the industry. 
♦ 
Competitive pressures associated with the threat of new entrants into the 
market. 
♦ 
Competitive pressures coming from the attempts of companies in other 
industries to win buyers over to their own substitute products. 
♦ 
Competitive pressures stemming from supplier bargaining power and 
supplier-seller collaboration. 
♦ 
Competitive pressures stemming from buyer bargaining power and seller-
buyer Collaboration. 
The strategists can use the five-forces model to determine what competition is like 
in a given industry by undertaking the following steps: 
Step 1: Identify the specific competitive pressures associated with each of the five 
forces. 
Step 2: Evaluate how strong the pressures comprising each of the five forces are 
(fierce, strong, moderate to normal, or weak). 
Step 3: Determine whether the collective strength of the five competitive forces is 
conducive to earning attractive profits. 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 28>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure: Porter’s Five Force Model of Competition 
Porter’s five forces model is one of the most effective and enduring conceptual 
frameworks used to assess the nature of the competitive environment and to 
describe an industry’s structure. The interrelationship among these five forces gives 
each industry its own particular competitive environment. By applying Porter’s five 
forces model of industry attractiveness to their own industries, the manager can 
gauge their own firm’s strengths, weaknesses, and future opportunities. 
I. 
The Threat of New Entrants 
New entrants can reduce industry profitability because they add new 
production capacity leading to an increase supply of the product even at a 
lower price and can substantially erode existing firm’s market share position. 
New entrants are always a powerful source of competition. The new capacity 
and product range they bring in throw up new competitive pressure. And the 
bigger the new entrant, the more severe the competitive effect. New entrants 
also place a limit on prices and affect the profitability of existing players. A 
 
INDUSTRY 
COMPETITORS 
SUPPLIERS 
Competitive pressures 
stemming from 
suppliers Bargaining 
Power 
POTENTIAL 
NEW  
ENTRANTS 
Competitive pressures 
coming from the threat of 
entry of new rivals 
BUYERS 
Competitive pressures 
stemming from buyer 
Bargaining Power 
Competitive 
pressures coming 
from substitute 
products 
FIRMS IN OTHER 
INDUSTRIES OFFERING 
SUBSTITUTE 
PRODUCTS 
RIVALRY AMONG 
EXISTING FIRMS 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 29>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.29 
firm’s profitability tends to be higher when other firms are blocked from 
entering the industry. 
To discourage new entrants, existing firms can try to raise barriers to entry. 
Barriers to entry represent economic forces (or ‘hurdles’) that slow down or 
impede entry by other firms. Common barriers to entry include, capital 
requirements, economies of scale, product differentiation, switching costs, 
brand identity, access to distribution channels and possibility of aggressive 
retaliation by existing players. These are explained as follows: 
(i)  
Capital Requirements: When a large amount of capital is required to 
enter an industry, firms lacking funds are effectively barred from the 
industry, thus enhancing the profitability of existing firms in the industry.  
(ii)  Economies of Scale: Many industries are characterized by economic 
activities driven by economies of scale. Economies of scale refer to the 
decline in the per-unit cost of production (or other activity) as volume 
grows. A large firm that enjoys economies of scale can produce high 
volumes of goods at successively lower costs. This tends to discourage 
new entrants.  
(iii)  Product Differentiation: Product differentiation refers to the physical 
or perceptual differences, or enhancements, that make a product special 
or unique in the eyes of customers. Firms in the personal care products 
and cosmetics industries actively engage in product differentiation to 
enhance their products’ features. Differentiation works to reinforce entry 
barriers because the cost of creating genuine product differences may 
be too high for the new entrants. 
(iv)  Switching Costs: To succeed in an industry, new entrant must be able 
to persuade existing customers of other companies to switch to its 
products. To make a switch, buyers may need to test a new firm’s 
product, negotiate new purchase contracts, and train personnel to use 
the equipment, or modify facilities for product use. Buyers often incur 
substantial financial (and psychological) costs in switching between 
firms. When such switching costs are high, buyers are often reluctant to 
change.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 30>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.30 
(v)  Brand Identity: The brand identity of products or services offered by 
existing firms can serve as another entry barrier. Brand identity is 
particularly important for infrequently purchased products that carry a 
high unit cost to the buyer. New entrants often encounter significant 
difficulties in building up the brand identity, because to do so they must 
commit substantial resources over a long period.  
(vi)  Access to Distribution Channels: The unavailability of distribution 
channels for new entrants poses another significant entry barrier. 
Despite the growing power of the internet, many firms may continue to 
rely on their control of physical distribution channels to sustain a barrier 
to entry to rivals. Often, existing firms have significant influence over the 
distribution channels and can retard or impede their use by new firms.  
(vii)  Possibility of Aggressive Retaliation: Sometimes the mere threat of 
aggressive retaliation by incumbents can deter entry by other firms into 
an existing industry. For example, introduction of products by a new 
firm may lead incumbents firms to reduce their product prices and 
increase their advertising budgets. 
II. 
Bargaining Power of Buyers 
This is another force that influences the competitive condition of the industry. 
This force will become heavier depending on the possibilities of the buyers 
forming groups or cartels. Mostly, this is a phenomenon seen in industrial 
products. Quite often, users of industrial products come together formally or 
informally and exert pressure on the producer. The bargaining power of the 
buyers influences not only the prices that the producer can charge but also 
influences in many cases, costs and investments of the producer because 
powerful buyers usually bargain for better services which involve costs and 
investment on the part of the producer. 
Buyers of an industry’s products or services can sometimes exert considerable 
pressure on existing firms to secure lower prices or better services. This 
leverage is particularly evident when: 
(i)  
Buyers have full knowledge of the sources of products and their 
substitutes. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 31>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.31 
(ii)  
They spend a lot of money on the industry’s products i.e. they are big 
buyers. 
(iii)  The industry’s product is not perceived as critical to the buyer’s needs 
and buyers are more concentrated than firms supplying the product. 
They can easily switch to the substitutes available. 
III. 
Bargaining Power of Suppliers 
Quite often suppliers, too, exercise considerable bargaining power over 
companies. The more specialised the offering from the supplier, greater is his 
clout. And, if the suppliers are also limited in number, they stand a still better 
chance to exhibit their bargaining power. The bargaining power of suppliers 
determines the cost of raw materials and other inputs of the industry and, 
therefore, industry attractiveness and profitability. 
Suppliers can influence the profitability of an industry in a number of ways. 
Suppliers can command bargaining power over a firm when: 
(i) 
Their products are crucial to the buyer and substitutes are not available. 
(ii)  
They can erect high switching costs. 
(iii)  They are more concentrated than their buyers. 
IV. 
The Nature of Rivalry in the Industry 
The rivalry among existing players is quite obvious. This is what is normally 
understood as competition. For any player, the competitors influence strategic 
decisions at different strategic levels. The impact is evident more at functional 
level in the prices being charged, advertising, and pressures on costs, product 
and so on. 
The intensity of rivalry in an industry is a significant determinant of industry 
attractiveness and profitability. The intensity of rivalry can influence the costs 
of suppliers, distribution, and of attracting customers and thus directly affect 
the profitability. The more intensive the rivalry, the less attractive is the 
industry. Rivalry among competitors tends to be cutthroat and industry 
profitability low under various conditions explained as follows: 
(i)  
Industry Leader: A strong industry leader can discourage price wars by 
disciplining initiators of such activity. Because of its greater financial 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 32>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.32 
resources, a leader can generally outlast smaller rivals in a price war. 
Knowing this, smaller rivals often avoid initiating such a contest. 
(ii)  Number of Competitors: Even when an industry leader exists, the 
leader’s ability to exert pricing discipline diminishes with the increased 
number of rivals in the industry as communicating expectations to 
players becomes more difficult. 
(iii)  Fixed Costs: When rivals operate with high fixed costs, they feel strong 
motivation to utilize their capacity and therefore are inclined to cut 
prices when they have excess capacity. Price cutting causes profitability 
to fall for all firms in the industry as firms seek to produce more to cover 
costs that must be paid regardless of industry demand. For this reason, 
profitability tends to be lower in industries characterized by high fixed 
costs. 
(iv)  Exit Barriers: Rivalry among competitors declines if some competitors 
leave an industry. Profitability therefore tends to be higher in industries 
with few exit barriers. Exit barriers come in many forms. Assets of a firm 
considering exit may be highly specialized and therefore of little value 
to any other firm. Such a firm can thus find no buyer for its assets. This 
discourages exit. When barriers to exit are powerful, competitors 
desiring exit may refrain from leaving. Their continued presence in an 
industry exerts downward pressure on the profitability of all 
competitors. 
(v)  Product Differentiation: Firms can sometimes insulate themselves 
from price wars by differentiating their products from those of rivals. As 
a consequence, profitability tends to be higher in industries that offer 
opportunity for differentiation. Profitability tends to be lower in 
industries involving undifferentiated commodities such as, memory 
chips, natural resources, processed metals and railroads. 
(vi)  Slow Growth: Industries whose growth is slowing down tend to face 
more intense rivalry. As industry growth slows, rivals must often fight 
harder to grow or even to keep their existing market share. The resulting 
intensive rivalry tends to reduce profitability for all. 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 33>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.33 
V. 
Threat of Substitutes 
Substitute products are a latent source of competition in an industry. In many 
cases they become a major constituent of competition. Substitute products 
offering a price advantage and/or performance improvement to the consumer 
can drastically alter the competitive character of an industry. And they can 
bring it about all of a sudden. For example, coir suffered at the hands of 
synthetic fibre. Wherever substantial investment in R&D is taking place, 
threats from substitute products can be expected. Substitutes, too, usually 
limit the prices and profits in an industry. 
A final force that can influence industry profitability is the availability of 
substitutes for an industry’s product. To predict profit pressure from this 
source, firms must search for products that perform the same, or nearly the 
same, function as their existing products. For example, Real estate, insurance, 
bonds and bank deposits for example are clear substitutes for common stocks, 
because they represent alternate ways to invest funds. 
The five forces together determine industry attractiveness/ profitability. This 
is so because these forces influence the causes that underlie industry 
attractiveness/ profitability. For example, elements such as cost and 
investment needed for being a player in the industry decide industry 
profitability, and all such elements are governed by these forces. The collective 
strength of these five competitive forces determines the scope to earn 
attractive profits. The strength of the forces may vary from industry to industry. 
2.5.2 Attractiveness of Industry 
The industry analysis culminates into identification of various issues and draw 
conclusions about the relative attractiveness or unattractiveness of the industry, 
both near-term and long-term. Strategists assess the industry outlook carefully, 
deciding whether industry and competitive conditions present an attractive 
business opportunity for the organisation or whether its growth and profit 
prospects are gloomy. This is important because companies invest capital, either 
the promoters or from the public and should be inherent careful in choosing an 
industry. The important factors on which the management may base such 
conclusions include: 
♦ 
The industry’s growth potential, is it futuristically viable? 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 34>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.34 
♦ 
Whether competition currently permits adequate profitability and whether 
competitive forces will become stronger or weaker? 
♦ 
Whether industry profitability will be favourably or unfavourably affected by 
the prevailing driving forces? 
♦ 
The competitive position of an organisation in the industry and whether its 
position is likely to grow stronger or weaker. (Being a well-entrenched leader 
or strongly positioned contender in an otherwise lackluster industry can still 
produce good profitability; however, having to fight an uphill battle against 
much stronger rivals can make an otherwise attractive industry unattractive). 
♦ 
The potential to capitalize on the vulnerabilities of weaker rivals (perhaps 
converting an unattractive industry situation into a potentially rewarding 
company opportunity). 
♦ 
Whether the company is able to defend against or counteract the factors that 
make the industry unattractive? 
♦ 
The degrees of risk and uncertainty in the industry’s future. 
♦ 
The severity of problems confronting the industry as a whole. 
♦ 
Whether continued participation in this industry adds importantly to the firm’s 
ability to be successful in other industries in which it may have business 
interests? 
As a general proposition, if an industry’s overall profit prospects are above average, 
the industry can be considered attractive; if its profit prospects are below average, 
it is unattractive. However, it is a mistake to think of industries as being attractive 
or unattractive to all firms in the industry and all potential entrants. Attractiveness 
is relative, not absolute. Industry environments unattractive to weak competitors 
may be attractive to strong competitors.  
An assessment that the industry is fundamentally attractive typically suggests that 
current industry participants employ strategies calculated to strengthen their long-
term competitive positions in the business, expanding sales efforts and investing 
in additional facilities and equipment as needed. If the industry and competitive 
situation is judged relatively unattractive, more successful industry participants may 
choose to invest cautiously, look for ways to protect their long-term 
competitiveness and profitability, and perhaps acquire smaller firms if the price is 
right; over the longer term, strong companies may consider diversification into 
more attractive businesses. Weak companies in unattractive industries may 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 35>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.35 
consider merging with a rival to bolster market share and profitability or, 
alternatively, begin looking outside the industry for attractive diversification 
opportunities. 
2.5.3 Experience Curve 
Experience curve akin to a learning curve which explains the efficiency increase 
gained by workers through repetitive productive work. Experience curve is based 
on the commonly observed phenomenon that unit costs decline as a firm 
accumulates experience in terms of a cumulative volume of production. It is based 
on the concept, “we learn as we grow”. 
The implication is that larger firms in an industry would tend to have lower unit 
costs as compared to those for smaller companies, thereby gaining a competitive 
cost advantage.  
Experience curve results from a variety of factors such as learning effects, 
economies of scale, product redesign and technological improvements in 
production. 
Experience curve has following features: 
♦ 
As business organisation grow, they gain experience. 
♦ 
Experience may provide an advantage over the competition. Experience is a 
key barrier to entry. 
♦ 
Large and successful organisation possess stronger “experience effect”. 
A typical experience curve may be depicted as follows: 
 
Figure: Experience curve 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 36>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.36 
As a business grows, it understands the complexities and benefits from its 
experiences.  
The concept of experience curve is relevant for a number of areas in strategic 
management. For instance, experience curve is considered a barrier for new firms 
contemplating entry in an industry. It is also used to build market share and 
discourage competition. In the contemporary Indian automobile industry, the 
experience curve phenomenon seems to be working in Maruti Suzuki. The likely 
strategic choice for competitors can be a market niche approach or segmentation 
based on demography or geography. 
2.5.4 Value Creation 
The concept of value creation was introduced primarily for providing products and 
services to the customers with more worth. Value is measured by a product’s 
features, quality, availability, durability, performance and by its services for which 
customers are willing to pay. Further, the concept took more space in the business 
and organizations started discussing about the value creation for stakeholders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure: Value Creation 
Thus, we can say that the value creation is an activity or performance by the firm 
to create value that increases the worth of goods, services, business processes or 
even the whole business system. Many businesses now focus on value creation both 
Customer’s 
Surplus 
Firm’s 
Margin 
Firm’s Cost of Value Creation 
Price 
Value to Customer 
Profitable 
Pricing Band 
0 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 37>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.37 
in the context of creating better value for customers purchasing its products and 
services, as well as for stakeholders in the business who want to see their 
investment in business appreciate in value. Ultimately, this concept gives business 
a competitive advantage in the industry and helps them earn above average 
profits/returns.  
Competitive advantage leads to superior profitability. At the most basic level, how 
profitable a company becomes depends on three factors:  
(1)  
the value customers place on the company’s products;  
(2)  
the price that a company charges for its products; and  
(3)  
the costs of creating those products.  
The value customers place on a product reflects the utility they get from a 
product—the happiness or satisfaction gained from consuming or owning the 
product. Utility must be distinguished from price. Utility is something that 
customers get from a product. It is a function of the attributes of the product, such 
as its performance, design, quality, and point-of-sale and after-sale service. 
Companies are ultimately aiming to achieve sustainable competitive advantage, 
which enables them to succeed in the long run. Michael Porter argues that a 
company can generate competitive advantage in two different ways, either through 
differentiation or cost advantage. According to Porter’s, differentiation means the 
capability to provide customers superior and special value in the form of product’s 
special features and quality or in the form of aftersales customer service. As a result 
of differentiation, a company can demand higher price for its products or services. 
A company will earn higher profits due to differentiation in case the expenses stay 
comparable to the costs of competitors.  
The above-mentioned differentiation and cost advantage will affect a company’s 
ability to achieve competitive advantage, but there are many different 
organizational functions that will influence whether a company can achieve cost 
advantage or differentiation advantage. Michael Porter used the concept of value 
chain to explore closer different functions of the organisations and mutual 
interactions among those functions. Value chain analysis provides an excellent tool 
to examine the origin of competitive advantage. It divides the organisations into 
two different strategically important group of activities, namely, primary activities 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 38>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.38 
and supporting activities, which can help to comprehend the potential sources for 
differentiation and to understand an organisation’s costs behaviour. 
It is basically the value consumer wants to pay, over and above the price that the 
business wants to charge from the consumer. This excess amount is called value 
creation, wherein the consumers value the product or service more than it actually 
costs them. 
2.6 
MARKET AND CUSTOMER 
A market is a place for interested parties, buyers and sellers, where items and 
services can be exchanged for a price. The market might be physical, such as a 
departmental store where people engage in person. They may also be virtual, such 
as an online market where buyers and sellers do not meet in person but tools of 
technology to strike a deal. In addition to this broad definition, the term market 
can apply to a wide range of contexts. For example, it might be used to describe 
the stock exchange, where securities are traded. It may also refer to a group of 
individuals trying to buy a specific commodity or service in a specific place, such as 
grain or vegetable market where farmers come to sell their produce. It may also be 
used to define a business or industry, such as the global oil market. 
While the market is a place, business strategist work on marketing to improve the 
chances of success. The term "marketing" encompasses a wide range of operations, 
including research, designing, pricing, promotion, transportation, and distribution. 
Often market activities are categorised and explained in terms of four Ps of 
marketing – product, place, pricing, and promotion. These four kinds of marketing 
activities help marketers identify customer needs so they may meet their demands 
and deliver satisfaction. Delivering the best customer experience and establishing, 
maintaining, and growing relationships with customers are the main goals of 
marketing. 
The orientation of product marketing has evolved and acquired different 
dimensions centred around product, production, sales and customers. Businesses 
that have product orientation think that buyers will choose those products that 
have the best quality, performance, design, or features. Next, there are production-
oriented businesses that believe that customers choose low price products. Sales-
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 39>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.39 
oriented businesses believe that if they spend enough money on advertisement, 
sales and promotion, customers can be persuaded to make a purchase. 
In a customer or market-oriented approach strategists prioritise efforts on their 
customers. In order to create better value propositions for customers, businesses 
gather, disseminate, and use customer and competitive information. A customer-
centric business is one that continuously learn from its customers' needs and 
market dynamics. In the present times success, many business lies in customer 
centric approaches. 
2.6.1 Customer 
A customer is a person or business that buys products or services from another 
organisation. Customers are important because they provide revenue and 
organisations cannot exist without them. All businesses vie for customers, either by 
aggressively marketing their products or by lowering their pricing to boost their 
customer bases. The terms customer and consumer are practically synonymous and 
are frequently used interchangeably. There is, however, a thin distinction. 
Individuals or businesses that consume or utilise products and services are referred 
to as consumers. Customers are the purchasers of products and services in the 
economy, and they might exist as consumers or only as customers. In homes 
groceries are often bought by a parent and consume by all the members of family. 
Businesses routinely research the characteristics of their consumers in order to fine-
tune their marketing strategies and adjust their inventory to attract the most 
customers. Customers are frequently categorised based on demographics like as 
age, race, gender, ethnicity, economic level, and geographic region, which may all 
assist businesses in developing a profile of a perfect customer.  
2.6.2 Customer Analysis 
Customer analysis is an essential marketing component of any strategic business 
plan. It identifies target clients, determines their wants, and then defines how the 
product meets those needs.  Thus, it involves the examination and evaluation of 
consumer needs, desires, and wants.  
Customer analysis includes the administration of customer surveys, the study of 
consumer data, the evaluation of market positioning strategies, development of 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 40>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.40 
customer profiles, and the selection of the best market segmentation techniques. 
Using the facts generated by customer analysis, an effective profiling of customers 
may be established. Customer profiles can reveal demographic information about 
customers. A number of parties, including buyers, sellers, distributors, salespeople, 
managers, wholesalers, retailers, suppliers, and creditors, can assist in gathering 
information to effectively assess the needs and desires of consumers. Successful 
businesses constantly monitor the behaviour of existing and prospective 
customers. 
2.6.3 Customer Behaviour 
Customer behaviour moves beyond the identification of customers to explain how 
they purchase products. It examines elements like shopping frequency, product 
preferences, and the perception of your marketing, sales, and service offerings. 
Understanding these details allows businesses to communicate with customers in 
an effective manner. Understanding the behaviours of customers enables 
businesses to establish effective marketing and advertising campaigns, provide 
products and services that meet their needs, and retain customers for repeat sales. 
Consumer behaviour may be influenced by a number of things. These elements can 
be categorised into the following three conceptual domains: 
♦ 
External 
Influences: 
External 
influences, 
like 
advertisement, 
peer 
recommendations or social norms, have a direct impact on the psychological 
and internal processes that influence various consumer decisions. The focus 
of external effects is on the numerous elements that have an impact on 
customers as they choose which needs to satisfy and which products to use to 
do so. These aspects are divided into two groups – the company's marketing 
efforts and the numerous environmental elements. 
♦ 
Internal Influences: Internal processes are psychological factors internal to 
customer and affect consumer decision making.  Consumer behaviour is 
influenced by a combination of internal and external influences, including 
motivation and attitudes. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 41>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.41 
 
Figure: Process of consumer behaviour 
♦ 
Decision Making: A rational consumer, as decision maker would seek 
information about potential decisions and carefully integrate this with the 
existing knowledge about the product. After weighing the advantages and 
disadvantages of each option, they would make a decision. The stages of 
decision making process can be described as: 
 
Problem recognition, i.e., identify an existing need or desire that is 
unfulfilled  
 
Search for desirable alternative and list them 
 
Seeking information on available alternatives and weighing their pros 
and cons. 
 
Make a final choice 
This behaviour of making decisions happens very frequently. However, it 
mostly applies when the purchase is one that is significant to the customer, 
such as when the product could have a significant influence on their health or 
self-image. The process is extremely valid when purchasing a car, television or 
a refrigerator in contrast to purchase of ice creams or soft drinks.  
♦ 
Post-decision Processes: After making a decision and purchasing a product, 
the final phase in the decision-making process is evaluating the outcome. The 
consumer's reaction may vary depending upon the satisfaction. While a happy 
customer may make repeat purchase and recommend to others, customer 
with dissonance will neither purchase the product again nor recommend it to 
others. 
 
Purchase and 
Post Purchase 
Actions 
External Factors 
Market Stimuli 
Environmental 
Factors 
Internal Factors 
Decision 
Making 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 42>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.42 
2.7 
COMPETITIVE STRATEGY  
Competition is a fundamental attribute of economic systems and business, and it 
is frequently connected with small and large organisations. Businesses compete 
with each other for the same set of resources and customers. Within a industry, 
competition is frequently encouraged with the wider goal of attaining and 
achieving higher quality services or superior goods that the firm may manufacture 
or develop.  
The competitive strategy of a business is concerned with how to compete in the 
business areas in which the organization operates. In other words, competitive 
strategy defines how a firm expects to create and sustain a competitive advantage 
over competitors. Having a competitive advantage over competitors means being 
more profitable in the long run. The competitive strategy of a firm within a certain 
business field is analysed using two criteria: the creation of competitive 
advantage and the protection of competitive advantage.  
An important component of industry and competitive analysis involves delving into 
the industry’s competitive process to discover what the main sources of competitive 
pressure are and how strong each competitive force is. This analytical step is 
essential because managers cannot devise a successful strategy without in-depth 
understanding of the industry’s competitive character. Even though competitive 
pressures in various industries are never precisely the same, the competitive 
process works similarly enough to use a common analytical framework in gauging 
the nature and intensity of competitive forces.  
Porter’s five forces model is useful in understanding the competition. It is a 
powerful tool for systematically diagnosing the main competitive pressures in a 
market and assessing how strong and important each one is. Not only is it the 
widely used technique of competition analysis, but it is also relatively easy to 
understand and apply.   
2.7.1 COMPETITIVE LANDSCAPE 
Competitive landscape is a business analysis which identifies competitors, either 
direct or indirect. Competitive landscape is about identifying and understanding 
the competitors and at the same time, it permits the comprehension of their vision, 
mission, core values, niche market, strengths and weaknesses. Understanding of 
competitive landscape requires an application of “competitive intelligence”. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 43>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.43 
An in-depth investigation and analysis of a firm’s competition allows it to assess 
the competitor’s strengths and weaknesses in the marketplace and helps it to 
choose and implement effective strategies that will improve its competitive 
advantage. Thus, understanding the competitive landscape is important to build 
upon a competitive advantage. 
Steps to understand the Competitive Landscape 
i. 
Identify the competitor: The first step to understand the competitive 
landscape is to identify the competitors in the firm’s industry and have actual 
data about their respective market share. 
 
This answers the question:  
 
Who are the competitors and how big are they? 
ii. 
Understand the competitors: Once the competitors have been identified, the 
strategist can use market research report, internet, newspapers, social media, 
industry reports, and various other sources to understand the products and 
services offered by them in different markets. 
 
This answers the question:  
 
What are their product and services? 
iii. 
Determine the strengths of the competitors: What are the strengths of the 
competitors? What do they do well? Do they offer great products? Why are 
consumers liking their product/service? Do they utilize marketing in a way that 
comparatively reaches out to more consumers? Why do customers give them 
their business? 
 
This answers the questions:  
 
What are their financial positions? 
 
What gives them cost and price advantage? 
 
What are they likely to do next? 
 
How strong is their distribution network? 
 
What are their human resource strengths? 
iv. 
Determine the weaknesses of the competitors: Identify the areas where 
the competitor is lacking or is weak. Weaknesses (and strengths) can be 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 44>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.44 
identified by going through consumer reports and reviews appearing in 
various media. Financial strength and weakness can always be learnt from 
annual reports. 
 
This answers the question. 
 
Where are they lacking? 
v. 
Put all of the information together:  At this stage, the strategist should put 
together all information about competitors and draw inference about what 
they are not offering and what the firm can do to fill in the gaps. The strategist 
can also know the areas which need to be strengthen by the firm. 
 
This answers the questions:  
 
What will the business do with this information?  
 
What improvements does the firm need to make? 
 
How can the firm exploit the weaknesses of competitors? 
2.7.2 Key factors for competitive success 
An industry’s Key Success Factors (KSFs) are those things that most affect industry 
members’ ability to prosper in the marketplace - the particular strategy elements, 
product attributes, resources, competencies, competitive capabilities, and business 
outcomes that spell the difference between profit and loss and, ultimately, between 
competitive success or failure. KSFs by their very nature are so important that all 
firms in the industry must pay close attention to them.  
Key success factors are the prerequisites for industry success or, to put it another 
way, KSFs are the factors that shape whether a company will be financially and 
competitively successful. 
The answers to three questions help identify an industry’s key success factors: 
♦ 
On what basis do customers choose between the competing brands of sellers? 
What product attributes are crucial to sales? 
♦ 
What resources and competitive capabilities does a seller need to have to be 
competitively successful, better human capital, quality of product or quantity 
of product, cost of service, etc.? 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 45>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.45 
♦ 
What does it take for sellers to achieve a sustainable competitive advantage, 
something that can be sustained for long term? 
For example, in apparel manufacturing, the KSFs are appealing designs and colour 
combinations (to create buyer interest) and low-cost manufacturing efficiency (to 
permit attractive retail pricing and ample profit margins).  
Determining the industry’s key success factors, given prevailing and anticipated 
industry and competitive conditions, is a top-priority analytical consideration. At 
the very least, managers need to understand the industry situation well enough to 
know what is more important to competitive success and what is less important. 
They need to know what kind of resources are competitively valuable. 
Misdiagnosing the industry factors critical to long-term competitive success greatly 
raises the risk of a misdirected strategy. In contrast, an organisation with perceptive 
understanding of industry KSFs can gain sustainable competitive advantage by 
training its strategy on industry KSFs and devoting its energies to being distinctively 
better than rivals on one or more of these factors. Indeed, business organisations 
that stand out on a particular KSF enjoy a stronger market position for their, efforts-
being distinctively better than rivals on one or more key success factors presents a 
golden opportunity for gaining competitive advantage. Hence, using the industry’s 
KSFs as cornerstones for the company’s strategy and trying to gain sustainable 
competitive advantage by excelling at one particular KSF is a fruitful competitive 
strategy approach. 
Key success factors vary from industry to industry and even from time to time within 
the same industry as driving forces and competitive conditions change. Only rarely 
does an industry have more than three or four key success factors at any one time. 
And even among these three or four, one or two usually outrank the others in 
importance. Managers, therefore, have to resist the temptation to include factors that 
have only minor importance on their list of key success factors. The purpose of 
identifying KSFs is to make judgments about what things are more important to 
competitive success and what things are less important. To compile a list of every 
factor that matters even a little bit defeats the purpose of concentrating 
management attention on the factors truly critical to long-term competitive success. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 46>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.46 
SUMMARY 
In this chapter, we learnt about the concept of strategic analysis, which is an 
important tool to appreciate and assess environment of business as it largely 
defines how an organisation conducts its operations. We have also discussed in 
detail the environmental influences on business functioning and competition. 
Employees, 
customer 
demands 
and 
expectations, 
supply 
and 
demand, 
management, clients, suppliers, owners, government actions, technological 
innovation, social trends, market trends, economic changes, and so on are all part 
of the business environment.  
Modern businesses face competitive challenges covering condition in a market in 
which businesses or sellers struggle for the attention of buyers in order to attain a 
certain commercial goal. We explored competition and competitive landscape, 
which is a business analysis to identify competitors, either direct or indirect. The 
chapter also covered PESTLE analysis, product life cycle, experience curve, 
competitive analysis and value chain analysis,  
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. 
KSFs stand for: 
(a) 
Key strategic factors 
(b)  
Key supervisory factors 
(c) 
Key success factors 
(d) 
Key sufficient factors 
2. 
Competitive landscape requires the application of- 
(a) 
Competitive advantage 
(b) 
Competitive strategy 
(c) 
Competitive acumen 
(d) 
Competitive intelligence  
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 47>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.47 
3.  
The term PESTLE analysis is used to describe a framework for analyzing: 
(a) 
Macro Environment 
(b) 
Micro Environment 
(c)  
Both Macro and Micro Environment 
(d)  
None of above 
4. 
"Attractiveness of Firms" while conducting industry analysis should be seen in? 
(a)  
Relative Terms 
(b)  
Absolute Terms 
(c)  
Percentage Terms 
(d)  
All of the Above 
5. 
Which of the following is NOT a Michael Porter's Five Competitive Forces? 
(a)  
Threat of New Entrants 
(b)  
Rivalry among existing firms 
(c)  
Bargaining Power of Unions 
(d)  
Bargaining Power of Suppliers 
6. 
Which of the following constitute Demographic Environment? 
(a)  
Nature of economy i.e. capitalism, socialism, Mixed   
(b)  
Size, composition, distribution of population, sex ratio 
(c)  
Foreign trade policy of Government 
(d)  
Economic policy i.e. fiscal and monetary policy of Government 
7. 
All are elements of Macro environment except: 
(a) 
Society 
(b) 
Government 
(c) 
Competitors  
(d) 
Technology  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 48>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.48 
8.  
The emphasis on product design is very high, the intensity of competition is low, 
and the market growth rate is low in the ______ stage of the industry life cycle. 
(a) 
Maturity 
(b) 
Introduction 
(c) 
Growth 
(d) 
Decline 
Scenario Based Questions 
1.   
ABC Corp, a multinational consumer electronics company, is planning to expand 
its operations into a new country. The company's senior management is 
evaluating the potential risks and opportunities of entering this new market. As 
part of their analysis, they decide to use the PESTLE framework to assess the 
external factors that could impact their decision. How can the PESTLE framework 
help ABC Corp assess the external factors affecting its decision to expand into a 
new country? 
2.  
You are a strategic manager for a tech company launching a new smartphone 
model. The company wants to target tech-savvy consumers who value 
innovation and cutting-edge technology. Using the concept of customer 
behavior, develop a marketing strategy to promote the new smartphone. 
3. 
GreenThrift Inc., a sustainable clothing retailer, is experiencing a surge in 
popularity due to the growing awareness of environmental issues among 
consumers. The company specializes in selling second-hand clothing and 
upcycled garments, offering an eco-friendly alternative to traditional fast 
fashion. 
 
A major concern for GreenThrift Inc. is the emergence of new sustainable fashion 
brands in the market. These brands focus on using organic and recycled 
materials, as well as ethical manufacturing practices, which align with the 
values of environmentally conscious consumers.  
4. 
Reshuffle Corp is a company that manufactures and sells office furniture. They 
offer a range of products, from desks and chairs to cabinets and shelves. 
Recently, the company has been facing increased competition from online 
retailers offering similar products at lower prices. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 49>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.49 
 
Analyzing the characteristics of products in the furniture industry, discuss how 
Reshuffle Corp can differentiate its products to maintain a competitive edge in 
the market. 
5.  
Riya Sharma owns a confectionery business in Jaipur, specializing in 
homemade chocolates and candies. Despite holding a substantial market share 
in the central region, her business has experienced declining sales of these 
products over the last few years. Concerned about the market dynamics, Riya 
consults a management expert for guidance. The consultant recommends a 
comprehensive understanding of the competitive landscape. Explain the steps 
to be followed by Riya Sharma to understand the competitive landscape to 
address the sales decline. 
6.  
A company has recently launched a new product in the market. Initially, it faced 
slow sales growth, limited markets, and high prices. However, over time, the 
demand for the product expanded rapidly, prices fell, and competition 
increased. Identify the stages of the product life cycle (PLC) that the company 
went through. 
7. 
Rajiv Arya owns an electrical appliance company specializing in the 
manufacture of domestic vacuum cleaners. The market is competitive, with four 
other manufacturers offering similar products and achieving comparable sales 
volumes. Additionally, these rival firms hold several patents related to the 
vacuum cleaner technology. The supplier base for raw materials is extensive, 
with multiple suppliers available. Identify and explain the significant forces 
from Porter’s Five Forces framework that are relevant to Rajiv Arya’s company. 
8. 
Suresh Singhania is the owner of an agri-based private company in Sangrur, 
Punjab. His unit is producing puree, ketchups and sauces. While its products 
have significant market share in the northern part of country, the sales are on 
decline in last couple of years. He seeks help of a management expert who 
advises him to first understand the competitive landscape.  
Explain the steps to be followed by Suresh Singhania to understand competitive 
landscape. 
9. 
Eco-carry bags Ltd., a recyclable plastic bags manufacturing, and trading 
company has seen a potential in the ever-growing awareness around hazards 
of plastics and the positive outlook of the society towards recycling and reusing 
plastics.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 50>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.50 
A major concern for Eco-carry bags Ltd. are paper bags and old cloth bags. Even 
though they are costlier than recyclable plastic bags, irrespective, they are being 
welcomed positively by the consumers.  
Identify and explain that competition from paper bags and old cloth bags fall 
under which category of Porter’s Five Forces Model for Competitive Analysis?  
10. 
Baby Turtle is a children's clothing brand that has been created a new age 
demand for washable diapers. The major benefit for the brand has been that not 
many companies have shown interest in the product, thinking it is not viable, 
however, customers, majorly working mothers are loving their product. The core 
material needed for production is also used in many other water proofing 
products in various industries. Baby Turtle sources this material from a 
renowned supplier at comparatively low prices. Which of the five forces of 
competitive pressure would Baby Turtle experience due to above setup and what 
are major factors that create such pressure for a product? Do you think Baby 
Turtle has an advantage in some way to fight off this pressure? 
Descriptive Questions 
1. 
Explain the concept of Experience Curve and highlight its relevance in strategic 
management. 
2. 
Write a short note on Product Life Cycle (PLC) and its significance in portfolio 
diagnosis.  
3. 
Explain Porter’s five forces model as to how businesses can deal with the 
competition. 
ANSWERS/SOLUTION 
Answers to Multiple Choice Questions 
1 
(c) 
2 
(d) 
3 
(a) 
4 
(a) 
5 
(c) 
6 
(b) 
7 
(c) 
8 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 51>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.51 
Answers to Scenario Based Questions 
1.  
The PESTLE framework can help ABC Corp assess the external factors affecting 
its decision to expand into a new country by considering the following aspects: 
♦ 
Political Factors: These include the stability of the government, 
government policies on foreign investment, trade agreements, and 
regulatory frameworks. By analyzing these factors, ABC Corp can assess 
the political risks associated with entering the new market. 
♦ 
Economic Factors: Economic factors such as GDP growth rate, inflation 
rate, exchange rates, and economic stability can impact ABC Corp's 
decision. By analyzing these factors, the company can understand the 
economic environment of the new market and its potential impact on 
business operations. 
♦ 
Social Factors: Social factors such as cultural norms, demographics, and 
lifestyle trends can influence consumer behavior and demand for ABC 
Corp's products. Understanding these factors can help the company 
tailor its marketing strategies to the new market. 
♦ 
Technological Factors: Technological factors such as infrastructure, 
technological advancements, and the level of technology adoption in 
the new market can impact ABC Corp's operations. By assessing these 
factors, the company can determine the technological requirements for 
entering the new market. 
♦ 
Legal Factors: Legal factors such as laws and regulations related to 
foreign investment, intellectual property rights, and labor laws can 
impact ABC Corp's decision. By analyzing these factors, the company can 
ensure compliance with legal requirements in the new market. 
♦ 
Environmental Factors: Environmental factors such as climate change, 
environmental regulations, and sustainability practices can impact ABC 
Corp's operations and reputation. By considering these factors, the 
company can assess the environmental risks and opportunities in the 
new market. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 52>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.52 
Overall, the PESTLE framework can provide ABC Corp with a comprehensive 
analysis of the external factors that could impact its decision to expand into a 
new country, helping the company make informed and strategic decisions. 
2. 
To target tech-savvy consumers for the new smartphone model, the tech 
company can develop a marketing strategy based on customer behavior. 
Consumer behaviour may be influenced by a number of things. These 
elements can be categorised into the following conceptual domains: 
♦ 
External Influences: Utilize online platforms and tech forums to 
generate buzz around the new smartphone. Partner with tech 
influencers and bloggers to review the product and create awareness 
among tech-savvy consumers. 
♦ 
Internal Influences: Appeal to the desire for innovation and advanced 
features among tech-savvy consumers. Highlight the unique selling 
points of the new smartphone, such as its cutting-edge technology, 
performance, and design. 
♦ 
Decision Making: Recognize that tech-savvy consumers are early 
adopters who value functionality and performance. Provide detailed 
specifications and comparisons with other smartphones to help them 
make an informed decision. 
♦ 
Post-decision Processes: Offer excellent customer service and support 
to address any technical issues or concerns. Encourage customers to 
provide feedback and reviews to build credibility and trust among tech-
savvy consumers. 
 
 
 
Purchase and
Post Purchase 
Actions 
 
External Factors 
Market Stimuli 
Environmental 
Factors 
Internal Factors 
Decision 
Making 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 53>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.53 
Figure: Process of consumer behaviour 
 
By understanding the behavior of tech-savvy consumers and aligning the 
marketing strategy with their preferences, the tech company can effectively 
promote the new smartphone and attract this demographic. 
3.  
Competition from new sustainable fashion brands falls under the "Threat of 
New Entrants" category of Porter’s Five Forces Model for Competitive Analysis. 
These new entrants pose a threat to existing sustainable clothing retailers like 
GreenThrift Inc. by increasing competition and potentially eroding market 
share. The emergence of these brands, focusing on using organic and recycled 
materials along with ethical manufacturing practices, aligns with the values of 
environmentally conscious consumers, making them strong competitors in the 
sustainable fashion market. 
 
4.  
To maintain a competitive edge in the face of increased competition, Reshuffle 
Corp can differentiate its products in several ways: 
• 
Tangible and Intangible Aspects: Reshuffle Corp can focus on the 
tangible aspects of its products, such as using high-quality materials 
and innovative designs to create furniture that is both functional and 
aesthetically pleasing. Additionally, they can emphasize the intangible 
aspects of their products, such as excellent customer service and a 
strong brand reputation for reliability and durability. 
• 
Pricing Strategies: While market prices are often dictated by 
competition, Reshuffle Corp can work on cost optimization to maintain 
profitability. They can also consider offering value-added services, such 
as free installation or extended warranties, to justify a higher price 
point. 
• 
Product Features: By continually optimizing their product features 
based on customer feedback and market trends, Reshuffle Corp can 
ensure that their products deliver maximum satisfaction to their target 
customers. This may include features that enhance functionality, design, 
quality, and overall user experience. 
• 
Product Centric Approach: Reshuffle Corp should keep their products 
at the center of their strategic activities, ensuring that all business 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 54>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.54 
processes, from production to sales and marketing, are aligned to meet 
customer needs and expectations. 
• 
Product Life Cycle Management: Reshuffle Corp should be aware of 
the life cycle of their products and plan for reinvention or replacement 
accordingly. They can introduce new product lines or upgrade existing 
ones to keep up with changing customer preferences and market 
trends. 
5.  Steps to understand the competitive landscape are as follows: 
(i) 
Identify the competitor: The first step to understanding the 
competitive landscape is to identify the competitors in the firm’s 
industry and have actual data about their respective market share.  
(ii) 
Understand the competitors: Once the competitors have been 
identified, the strategist can use market research report, internet, 
newspapers, social media, industry reports, and various other sources to 
understand the products and services offered by them in different 
markets.  
(iii) 
Determine the strengths of the competitors: What is the strength of 
the competitors? What do they do well? Do they offer great products? 
Do they utilize marketing in a way that comparatively reaches out to 
more consumers. Why do customers give them their business?  
(iv) 
Determine the weaknesses of the competitors: Weaknesses (and 
strengths) can be identified by going through consumer reports and 
reviews appearing in various media. After all, consumers are often willing 
to give their opinions, especially when the products or services are either 
great or very poor.  
(v) 
Put all of the information together: At this stage, the strategist should 
put together all information about competitors and draw inference 
about what they are not offering and what the firm can do to fill in the 
gaps. The strategist can also know the areas which need to be 
strengthened by the firm.  
6.  
The company went through the following stages of the product life cycle (PLC): 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 55>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.55 
 
Introduction stage: Initially, the company faced slow sales growth, limited 
markets, and high prices, which are characteristic of the introduction stage. 
During this stage, competition is almost negligible, and customers have 
limited knowledge about the product. 
 
Growth stage: Over time, the demand for the product expanded rapidly, 
prices fell, and competition increased. These are typical features of the growth 
stage in the PLC. In this stage, the product gains market acceptance, and 
customers become more aware of the product's benefits and show interest in 
purchasing it. 
7.  
The competitive rivalry will be a significant force in case of company of Rajiv 
Arya as all the rivals are similar in sizes and are manufacturing similar products. 
It is difficult for any single manufacturer to dominate the market. Large 
number of patents will make it difficult for new entrants to break into the 
market. Further, as there are a large number of small suppliers the power that 
suppliers can exert will also be low. 
 
There is no information relating to substitutes and bargaining power of 
customers in the information given in scenario. However, a domestic vacuum 
cleaner will directly compete with other options such as house maids. 
Availability of house maids at low cost can significantly disturb the sales of 
products. 
Further, as the products are similar customers can easily shift from one 
company to another. This will only enhance competitive rivalry. 
8. 
Steps to understand the competitive landscape:  
(i) 
Identify the competitor: The first step to understand the competitive 
landscape is to identify the competitors in the firm’s industry and have 
actual data about their respective market share.  
(ii) 
Understand the competitors: Once the competitors have been 
identified, the strategist can use market research report, internet, 
newspapers, social media, industry reports, and various other sources 
to understand the products and services offered by them in different 
markets.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 56>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.56 
(iii) 
Determine the strengths of the competitors: What is the strength of 
the competitors? What do they do well? Do they offer great products? 
Do they utilize marketing in a way that comparatively reaches out to 
more consumers? Why do customers give them their business?  
(iv) 
Determine the weaknesses of the competitors: Weaknesses (and 
strengths) can be identified by going through consumer reports and 
reviews appearing in various media. After all, consumers are often 
willing to give their opinions, especially when the products or services 
are either great or very poor.  
(v) 
Put all of the information together: At this stage, the strategist should 
put together all information about competitors and draw inference 
about what they are not offering and what the firm can do to fill in the 
gaps. The strategist can also know the areas which need to be 
strengthen by the firm.  
9. 
Eco-carry bags Ltd. faces competition from paper bags and old cloth bags and 
falls under Threat of Substitutes force categories in Porter’s Five Forces Model 
for Competitive Analysis. Paper and cloth bags are substitutes of recyclable 
plastic bags as they perform the same function as plastic bags. Substitute 
products are a latent source of competition in an industry. In many cases, they 
become a major constituent of competition. Substitute products offering a 
price advantage and/or performance improvement to the consumer can 
drastically alter the competitive character of an industry.  
10. 
Baby Turtle would experience, Bargaining Power of Suppliers, as a competitive 
pressure for their washable diaper product. This is because the core material 
for production is sourced from a single supplier, who is renowned and in a 
position to create pressure in terms of prices.  
Further, other factors that lead to such pressure are: 
1.  
Their products are crucial to the buyer and substitutes to the material 
required for production are not available. 
2.  
Suppliers can manipulate switching cost as the brand is in inception 
stage and making margins are important. 
An advantage that Baby Turtle has is even though the material required has 
no substitutes, but it used to make many other products and thus there are 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 57>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.57 
many other suppliers who can provide that material. It might affect operations 
in short term but will help to fight off the pressure created by existing supplier. 
Answers to Descriptive Questions 
1. 
Experience curve is similar to learning curve which explains the efficiency 
gained by workers through repetitive productive work. Experience curve is 
based on the commonly observed phenomenon that unit costs decline as a 
firm accumulates experience in terms of a cumulative volume of production.  
It is represented diagrammatically as shown in the next page. 
 
The implication is that larger firms in an industry would tend to have lower 
unit costs as compared to those of smaller organizations, thereby gaining a 
competitive cost advantage. Experience curve results from a variety of factors 
such as learning effects, economies of scale, product redesign and 
technological improvements in production. 
The concept of experience curve is relevant for a number of areas in strategic 
management. For instance, experience curve is considered a barrier for new 
firms contemplating entry in an industry. It is also used to build market share 
and discourage competition. 
2. 
Product Life Cycle is an important concept in strategic choice and S-shaped 
curve which exhibits the relationship of sales with respect of time for a product 
that passes through the four successive stages.  
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 58>>
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
2.58 
The first stage of PLC is the introduction stage in which competition is almost 
negligible, prices are relatively high and markets are limited. The growth in 
sales is also at a lower rate.  
The second stage of PLC is the growth stage, in which the demand expands 
rapidly, prices fall, competition increases and market expands.  
The third stage of PLC is the maturity stage, where in the competition gets 
tough and market gets stabilized. Profit comes down because of stiff 
competition. 
The fourth stage is the declining stage of PLC, in which the sales and profits 
fall down sharply due to some new product replaces the existing product. 
 
Product Life Cycle 
PLC can be used to diagnose a portfolio of products (or businesses) in order 
to establish the stage at which each of them exists. Particular attention is to 
be paid on the businesses that are in the declining stage. Depending on the 
diagnosis, appropriate strategic choice can be made. For instance, expansion 
may be a feasible alternative for businesses in the introductory and growth 
stages. Mature businesses may be used as sources of cash for investment in 
other businesses which need resources. A combination of strategies like 
selective harvesting, retrenchment, etc. may be adopted for declining 
businesses. In this way, a balanced portfolio of businesses may be built up by 
exercising a strategic choice based on the PLC concept. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 59>>
 
STRATEGIC ANALYSIS: EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
2.59 
3. 
To gain a deep understanding of a company’s industry and competitive 
environment, managers do not need to gather all the information they can 
find and waste a lot of time digesting it. Rather, the task is much more 
focused. A powerful and widely used tool for systematically diagnosing the 
significant competitive pressures in a market and assessing the strength and 
importance of each is the Porter’s five-forces model of competition. This 
model holds that the state of competition in an industry is a composite of 
competitive pressures operating in five areas of the overall market: 
 
Competitive pressures associated with the market manoeuvring and 
jockeying for buyer patronage that goes on among rival sellers in the 
industry. 
 
Competitive pressures associated with the threat of new entrants into 
the market.  
 
Competitive pressures coming from the attempts of companies in other 
industries to win buyers over to their own substitute products. 
 
Competitive pressures stemming from supplier bargaining power and 
supplier-seller collaboration. 
 
Competitive pressures stemming from buyer bargaining power and 
seller-buyer Collaboration. 
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
<<PAGE 60>>
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
